[page 6]
New Light of Myanmar: Union-level peace-making group and NMSP ink initial peace
deal
Mon 27 Feb 2012
Filed under: On The Border
Nay Pyi Taw — As the government of the Republic of the Union of Myanmar offered
the olive branch and New Mon State Party (NMSP) requested to engage in dialogue,
Union-level Peace-making Group comprised of Union Minister for Rail
Transportation U Aung Min, Union Minister for Industry U Soe Thein, Union
Minister for Electric Power No (1) U Zaw Min, Union Minister for Environmental
Conservation and Forestry U Win Tun and Mon State Chief Minister U Ohn Myint
arrived at Strand Hotel of Mawlamyine in Mon State on 24 February to sign an initial
peace agreement and firstly negotiated with NMSP peace-making group led by U Nai
Rawsa.Mon State Economic Development Meeting held at Strand Hotel in
Mawlamyine was attended by the Union ministers, the Mon State chief minister,
NMSP peace-making group led by U Nai Rawsa, departmental personnel,
entrepreneurs and scholars.
The chief minister and the Union ministers discussed development of the state and
answered queries by the entrepreneurs.
A dinner was hosted to the NMSP delegation for eternal peace where Mon State
cultural troupe performed Mon, Kayin and PaO traditional dances. Union Ministers U
Soe Thein and U Aung Min, on behalf of the President, presented 20 Sky Net
receivers, gifted by the President as a gift for eternal peace, to Vice-Chairman U Nai
Rawsa of NMSP peace-making group.
The chief minister presented 10 Sky Net receivers and flower bouquet to CEC
member of NMSP U Nai Talanyi and K 20 million to the fund of the party through
the NMSP vice-chairman.
A ceremony to sign initial peace agreement held at the same venue yesterday was
attended by Union-level Peacemaking Group comprised of Union Minister U Aung
Min, Union Minister U Soe Thein, Union Minister U Zaw Min, Union Minister U
Win Tun and State Chief Minister U Ohn Myint, Commander of South-East
Command Maj-Gen Tin Maung Win, Deputy Minister for Border Affairs Maj-Gen
Zaw Win, Mon State Security and Border Affairs Minister Col Htay Myint Aung, the
general staff officer (Grade I) from Commander-in-Chief (Army) Office, the general
staff officer (Grade 1) (militia) of South-East Command, Mon State advocate-general
and officials, NMSP peace-making group led by Vice-Chairman U Nai Rawsa and
peace negotiators of both sides.
The five-fact state-level initial peace agreement reached by five-member State-level
peace-making group led by Col Htay Myint Aung and five-member NMSP peace-
making group led by NMSP CEC member U Nai Talanyi on 1 February was approved
and singed in the presence of Union Ministers U Aung Min, U Soe Thein, U Zaw Min
and U Win Tun and State Chief Minister U Ohn Myint from Union-level peace-
making group.

[page 7]
The agreement is as follow:-
(a) Ceasefire by both sides.
(b) Formation of Union-level peace-making group and delegation for dialogue
officially and negotiation of date, time and venue for talk.
(c) Opening of communication office (with no arm) at an appropriate site agreed by
both sides.
(d) Negotiation will be made for holding arms beyond the areas agreed by both sides.
(e) Settlement at the sites agreed by both sides.
The Union-level peace-making group and NMSP peacemaking group signed four-fact
Union-level peace agreement.
The agreement is as follow:-—
(a) To observe ceasefire far and wide the nation, especially to end up armed conflicts
causing in areas of national races.
(b) To start political dialogue within at most 45 days of ceasefire.
Allowing participation of contributors as observers,
(1) To start political dialogue between representatives of armed national races
organizations and representatives of the government after ceasefire of all armed
national races organizations. In case ceasefire is not secured with all the organizations
till December 2012, to start the political dialogue between representatives of the
ceasefire organizations and representatives of the government.
(2) To continue talks on national reconciliation, based on political compromises with
participation of representatives of domestic national political parties and democratic
forces.
(3) To initiate procedures for prompt implementation of agreement reached in the
abovementioned dialogue.
(c) To work for stability and development of education, health and social sectors of
the region in coordination with respective national races armed organizations and the
government as the ceasefire comes into effect.
(d) General clauses: In periods of ceasefire and political dialogue,
(1) To have the right to communicate with the public and help each others.
(2) To have the right to communicate with domestic political parties.

[page 8]
(3) To have the right to communicate with news agencies and media. To inform the
public of outcomes of political dialogue as required.
(4) To conduct negotiation in advance in communicating with the foreign diplomats.
(5) To not extend military strength in Mon State and related areas in period of
ceasefire.
(6) To release all political prisoners remaining in the prisons and to free comrades of
New Mon State Party in prisons with sympathy as well.
(7) To avoid forced labour by both sides, apart from volunteers. To seek solution for
cases of people’s lands through coordination.
(Remark: If there is any other fact in addition to 10 abovementioned clauses, they will
be put forward.)
Col Htay Myint Aung and U Nai Talanyi exchanged state-level initial peace
agreement. Union Minister U Aung Min and U Nai Rawsa exchanged four-fact
Union-level peace agreement. They posed for documentary photos. - MNA
