ဂမောဝ်၊ တၞံ

တၞံဂမောဝ်

(

အၚ်္ဂလိက်

:

black- chubbily myrobalan

) နကဵုယၟုသိပ္ပံ

Terminalia chebula

ဝွံ ဒှ်ဂကူတၞံ

Terminalia

တမ်မူလ ကၠုင်နူ အာရှဒိုဟ်အဂၞဲ နူကဵု အိန္ဒိယ နဳပဝ်၊ လပါ်ဗမံက် ဍုင်ကြုက် ဒိုဟ်နေရတိ (ယူနာန်)၊ လပါ်သၠုင်ကျာမ္ဂး သဳရိလင်္ကာ၊ မလေရှာ ကေုာံ ဗဳယေတ်နာမ်။

လက်သန်

တၞံဂမောဝ် ဂှ်

ဒှ်တၞံဆုတဲလဒေါဝ် ကဵု တၞံဆုတဲဇၞော် ဇၞော်သၠုင် စဵုကဵုၜိုတ် ၃၀ မဳတာ (၉၈ပေ)တုဲ ဗွိုက်အနာံ ၝောအ်ဍေဟ်ဂှ် စဵုကဵု ၁ မဳတာ (၃ ပေ ၃ ၝောအ်တဲ) ဇၞော်မာန်ရ။ The leaves are alternate to subopposite in arrangement, oval, 7 8 centiမဳတာs (2.8 3.1 in) long and 4.5 10 centiမဳတာs (1.8 3.9 in) broad with a 1 3 centiမဳတာs (0.39 1.18 in) petiole. They have an acute tip, cordate at the base, margins entire, glabrous above with a yellowish pubescence below.

[

နွံပၟိက် ဗၟံက်ထ္ၜးတင်နိဿဲ

]

The fruit is drupe-like, 2 4.5 centiမဳတာs (0.79 1.77 in) long and 1.2 2.5 centiမဳတာs (0.47 0.98 in) broad, blackish, with five longitudinal ridges. The dull white to yellow flowers are monoecious, and have a strong, unpleasant odour. They are borne in terminal spikes or short panicles. The fruits are smooth ellipsoid to ovoid drupes, yellow to orange-brown in colour, with a single angled stone.

လွပ်

T. chebula

This tree yields smallish, ribbed and nut-like fruits which are picked when still green and then pickled, boiled with a little added sugar in their own syrup or used in preserves. The seed of the fruit, which has an elliptical shape, is an abrasive seed enveloped by a fleshy and firm pulp. Seven types of fruit are recognized (vijaya, rohini, putana, amrita, abhaya, jivanti, and chetaki), based on the region where the fruit is harvested, as well as the colour and shape of the fruit. Generally speaking, the

vijaya

variety is preferred, which is traditionally grown in the Vindhya Range of west-central India, and has a roundish as opposed to a more angular shape.

The fruit also provides material for tanning leather and dyeing cloth.

Terminalia chebula

is a main ingredient in the Ayurvedic formulation

Triphala

which is used for kidney and liver dysfunctions. The dried fruit is also used in Ayurveda as a purported antitussive, cardiotonic, homeostatic, diuretic, and laxative.

ဓါတ် မနွံဂမၠိုင်

A number of glycosides have been isolated from

haritaki

, including the triterpenes arjunglucoside I, arjungenin, and the chebulosides I and II. Other constituents include a coumarin conjugated with gallic acids called chebulin, as well as other phenolic compounds including ellagic acid, 2,4-chebulyl-β-D-glucopyranose, chebulinic acid, gallic acid, ethyl gallate, punicalagin, terflavin A, terchebin, luteolin, and tannic acid.

Chebulic acid is a phenolic acid compound isolated from the ripe fruits.

Luteic acid can be isolated from the bark.

ဗီုရုပ်

သတ်ထနေက်

သတ်ဂမောဝ် ဇမ္ကဟ်

ပကဴဂမောဝ်

ၝောအ်ဆု ဂမောဝ်

နိဿဲ

ကလေင်ကေတ်လဝ် နူ "

"