ဟကာံ၊ တၞံ

ဟကာံ

ဂှ် နကဵုယၟု ရုက္ခဗေဒမ္ဂး ကော်စ

Utricularia

နကဵုဘာသာအေင်္ကလိက်ဓမ္မတာမ္ဂး ကော်စ

bladderworts

ဍေဟ်လုပ်လၟိဟ် ပ္ဍဲဂကောံတၞံ carnivorous plant တုဲ သီုဖအိုတ် နွံဂကူလစှ်ေတၞဟ်ခြာ ၜိုတ် ၂၃၃ ဂကူဒှ်ရ။

တၞံဏအ်ဂှ် မလေပ်တိုန် ပ္ဍဲဍာ်ပတေက် ဂွံဆဵုကေတ်ဒၟံင် ပ္ဍဲ အာရှ ကဵု ဥရောပ ရ။ တၞံဂှ် ခတဝ်ဒၟံင် လတူဍာ်တုဲ ဟွံမဲကဵု ရိုဟ်မစှ်ေလပါ်သၟဝ်ရ။ ၝောအ်ဍေဟ်ဂှ် ပ္ဍဲမွဲရာသဳမ္ဂး ဇၞော်ဂၠိင် စဵုကဵု မွဲမဳတာမာန်ရ။ ပ္ကဴအသာ်မိတ် မနွံဗီုပြင် ပ္ကဴကလအ် (ပ္ကဴဂရဲ) မတိုန်နူ ၝောအ်ဍေဟ်တုဲ စူတိုန် လတူဍာ် မလေပ်ကဴ ပ္ဍဲအကြာဂိတုဨပြဳ ကဵု အဝ်ဂေတ်ရ။

တၞးဍေဟ် ဍိုန်ဍိုန်ဍောတ်ဍောတ် ဂၠိင်င်သောဲသောဲတုဲ နွံကဵု မမ ညံင်ကဵု ထိုင်ခၟာဲ ဗွဲမဂၠိုင်ရ။ ပ္ဍဲမွဲရာသဳမ္ဂး တၞံဍေဟ် ဂၠိင်စဵုကဵု မွဲမဳတာမာန်ရ။

All

Utricularia

are carnivorous and capture small organisms by means of bladder-like traps. Terrestrial species tend to have tiny traps that feed on minute prey such as

protozoa

and

rotifers

swimming in water-saturated soil. The traps can range in size from 0.02 to 1.2 cm (0.008 to 0.5 in).

Aquatic species, such as

U. vulgaris

(common bladderwort), possess bladders that are usually larger and can feed on more substantial prey such as water fleas

(

Daphnia

)

,

nematodes

and even

fish fry

,

mosquito

larvae

and young

tadpoles

. Despite their small size, the traps are extremely sophisticated. In the active traps of the aquatic species, prey brush against trigger hairs connected to the trapdoor. The bladder, when "set", is under negative pressure in relation to its environment so that when the trapdoor is mechanically triggered, the prey, along with the water surrounding it, is sucked into the bladder. Once the bladder is full of water, the door closes again, the whole process taking only ten to fifteen milliseconds.

Bladderworts are unusual and highly specialized plants, and the vegetative organs are not clearly separated into

roots

,

leaves

, and

stems

as in most other

angiosperms

.

Utricularia

lack a root system.

Bladder traps are recognized as one of the most sophisticated structures in the

plant

kingdom.

Inflorescence of

Utricularia vulgaris

နိဿဲ

ကလေင်ကေတ်လဝ် နူ "

"