စၠတ်ထဝ် ကၟိန်ဍုင်

စၠတ်ထဝ်ကၟိန်ဍုင် (

Assembly of the Union)

(Burmese: ပြည်ထောင်စု လွှတ်တော် [pjìdàʊɴz l̥ʊʔtɔ̀]se: ပြည်ထောင်စု လွှတ်ဝွံ ဒှ်ဒတန်ပတန်သၞောဝ် နကဵုကဆံင် အလုံကၟိန်ဍုင်ဗၟာ (နကဵုယၟု ပ္ဍဲသၞောဝ် ကၟိန်ဍုင်ပံင်ကောံသမတ ဗၟာ

Republic of the Union of Myanmar

) မဒက်ပ္တန် နကဵုသၞောဝ်လဒက်ပတန်ဍုင် ၂၀၀၈။ စၠတ်ထဝ်ကၟိန်ဍုင်ဂှ် ဒက်ပ္တန်လဝ် နကဵု စၠတ်ထဝ်ၜါ၊ စၠတ်ထဝ် ကောန်ဂကူ (အမျိုးသားလွှတ်တော်) (House of Nationalities)၊ နွံ ခုင် ၂၂၄၊ တုဲ စၠတ်ထဝ်ညးဍုင်ကွာန် (ပြည်သူံလွှတ်တော်) (House of Representatives) နွံ ခုင် ၄၄၀။

ဇၟပ်ပ် တွဵုရး ကေုာံ ရးဒေသဇၞော် သီုဖအိုတ် ၁၄ ဂှ် နွံကဵု စၠတ်ထဝ်ဒေသအိုတ်ရ။

စၠတ်ထဝ်ကၟိန်ဍုင် ဂှ် နွံပ္ဍဲ ဂအာင်ပါလဳမာန် ပၞောဝ်တိုက် ၃၁-မ ဂှ် ဒှ်တိုက်မွဲရ။

တိုက် ၃၁-မ ဂှ် ပစၞး ကု ၃၁ ဘုံ ပ္ဍဲကဵု စက္ကဝါဗုဒ္ဓဘာသာတုဲ သြိုင်လဝ်ရ။ ဂအာင်ပါလဳမာန်ဂှ် နွံပ္ဍဲဇေယျသဳရိ ပ္ဍဲနေပျဳဒဝ်။

အမာတ်စၠတ်ထဝ်တအ်ဂှ် ကၠုင်နူ မၞိဟ်မဒုင်ရုဲစှ်လဝ် နကဵုသဘင်မာဲ ကေုာံ မၞိဟ်စၞး ဒပ်ပၞာန်ဂမၠိုင်ရ။

ဝင်အတိက်

စၠတ်ထဝ် နကဵုဘာသာဗၟာ လွှတ်တော် ဟီုဂှ် ဒှ်ဝေါဟာရ မကၠုင်နူ ခေတ်ဨကရာဇ် မဒှ်သ္ၚိစၠတ်သၟိင်ဨကရာဇ်တုဲ ကၠုင်နူ အရေဝ်မန် စၠတ်ထဝ် မြဴသာ်ဝွံ ပ္ဍဲအဘိဓာန်ဗၟာတြေံ ဗၟံက်လဝ်ရ။ ဆဂး နကဵုလညာတ်မွဲပၠန် အရာမဒှ်မာန်အိုတ်ဂှ် လွှတ်တော် ဟီုဂှ် ဒှ်အရေဝ်ဗၟာ ဗလးအသံပါင်ဨကရာဇ်ရ။ ပ္ဍဲကဵု အခိုက် အခေတ်ဨကရာဇ်ဗၟာတေအ်မ္ဂး ဨကရာဇ်ဂှ် ညးမိက်ဂွံပ္တိတ် သၞောတ်မွဲမွဲမ္ဂး ညးတိတ်ကၠုင် ဇရေင်ဒၞာဲ မကဵုအမိင်ဂှ်တုဲ ညးဟီုရ။ ပ္ဍဲဒၞာဲဂှ်မ္ဂး ဂကောံအမာတ် သေနာပတိတအ် ကော်တုဲ မင်ကလင်အိုတ်ရ။ အခိင်ကာလ ဨကရာဇ် မတိတ်ဟီုဂှ် နကဵု ဘာသာဗၟာမ္ဂး ညးကော်စ "လွှတ်တော်မူအခါ" (အခါကာလ မဗလးအသံပါင်) ရ။ ဝေါဟာရမန် စၠတ်ထဝ် ဂှ် ၜိုန်ရ လညာတ်နူမဝေါဟာရဗၟာ လွှတ်တော် ပါလုပ်ဒၟံင်ကီုလေဝ် ပ္ဍဲခေတ်ဨကရာဇ်တေအ်ဂှ် နန်သွက်ဂွံဖျေဟ်သၞောဝ်၊ ဨကရာဇ်တအ် မပ္တိတ်အသံပါင်တအ်ဂှ် ဟိုတ်မနွံကဵု ကအ်စၠတ် တုဲ သ္ၚိစၠတ် (ဝါ) သ္ၚိကၠတ် မြဴသာ်ဝွံ ကော်စရ။ အရာမစပ်ကဵု ဨကရာဇ်တအ်မ္ဂး စုတ် "တော်" တုဲ မဟီုဗီုကဵု ဗၟာဂှ် ပ္ဍဲမန်ဟွံမဲ။ ဥပမာ နေပြည်တော် (ဒမံင်ဒတန်ဨကရာဇ်)၊ အမိန်တော် (အမိင်အသံဨကရာဇ်)။ ဟိုတ်ဂှ်ရ အရေဝ်ဗၟာ "လွှတ်တော်" ဝွံ ကၠုင်နူ အရေဝ်မန် ဟွံသေင်၊ ဒှ်အရေဝ်ဗၟာဇေတ်တ်ရ။

အခိုက် စၠတ်ထဝ်ဏအ် နွံကၠုင် နူကဵုခေတ်ဗုကာံရဂှ် ညးတအ်ပတှ်ေကေတ်ရ။

During the Konbaung dynasty, the hluttaw was the centre of government and the kingdom's national administrative body, divided into three branches, namely fiscal, executive, and judicial (Since the colonial times,

hluttaw

has been used to describe a parliament or legislative body.) The Byedaik (ဗြဲတိုက်) acted as the Privy Council, maintaining the inner affairs of the royal court, whereas the Hluttaw managed the kingdom's government. The Hluttaw, as tradition, also had the duty of selecting the heir-apparent, whenever the incumbent king did not select one.

In the Konbaung dynasty, the Hluttaw was in session for 6 hours daily, from 6 to 9 am, and from noon to 3 pm, attended by ministers (မင်းကြီး,

Mingyi

), ministers of third rank (ဝန်ထောက်,

Wundauk

), and head clerks (စာရေးကြီး,

Sayegyi

), as well as interior ministers (အတွင်းဝန်,

Atwin Wun

), who sat in the Byedaik.

It was tradition for the king to appoint four ministers, four interior ministers and four officers.

ဗြိတိတ်ဗာမာ

On 2 January 1923, with the enactment of the Montagu Chelmsford Reforms, Burma became a Governor's Province with a partially elected legislative council, the Legislative Council of Burma, consisting of 103 seats, with 80 filled by election.

The 1935 Government of Burma Act established the Legislature of Burma. During this period, the colonial Legislature consisted of two chambers, the 36-seat Senate and the 132-seat House of Representatives.

Union of Burma

From 1947 to 1962, under the 1947 Constitution, Burma's legislature, called the Union Parliament, consisted of two chambers, the 125-seat Lumyozu Hluttaw (the Chamber of Nationalities) and the 250-seat Pyithu Hluttaw; (the Chamber of Deputies), whose seat numbers were determined by the population size of respective constituencies.

Socialist Republic of the Union of Burma

From 1962 to 1974, there was no functional

hluttaw

in existence, as the ruling government was the socialist Union Revolutionary Council (RC).

From 1974 to 1988, under the 1974 Constitution, Burma's legislative branch was a one-party rubber stamp legislature consisting of a unicameral chamber, the Pyithu Hluttaw (the People's Assembly), represented by members of the Burma Socialist Programme Party. Each term was four years. (In August 2010, the old Hluttaw complex on Yangon's Pyay Road used by Gen. Ne Win's military government was slated for occupation by Yangon Division government offices.)

Union of Myanmar

Between 1988 and 2011, there was no functional

hluttaw

, as the ruling government was the State Peace and Development Council.

Composition

ထာမ်ပလိက်:Pyidaungsu Hluttaw composition

The Pyidaungsu Hluttaw is a bicameral body made up of a 440-seat House of Representatives (

Pyithu Hluttaw

) and the 224-seat House of Nationalities (

Amyotha Hluttaw

). The Pyidaungsu Hluttaw consists of 664 members total. 75% of MPs (498 members) are directly elected by voters, while the remaining 25% (166 members) are military personnel appointed by the Defence Services' Commander-in-Chief.

This policy is similar to Indonesia's New Order model (as part of the dwifungsi doctrine), which guaranteed a number of parliamentary seats to military appointees.

Amyotha Hluttaw

The Amyotha Hluttaw is the upper house of the Pyidaungsu Hluttaw, with 12 seats accorded to each Region or State for a total of 168 directly elected seats. Of the 224 seats in the house, the remaining 56 are military appointees nominated by the Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Services.

Pyithu Hluttaw

The Pyithu Hluttaw is the lower house of the Pyidaungsu Hluttaw, with seats accorded to each of the 330 townships in the country. Of the 440 seats in this body, 330 are directly elected and 110 are military appointees nominated by the Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Services.

Elections

Burmese elections are held under universal suffrage for all Burmese citizens above the age of 18 and on a given constituency's roll of eligible voters. Voters are constitutionally guaranteed the right to vote via secret ballot. However, members of religious orders (including members of the Buddhist Sangha), prisoners, mentally unsound persons, and indebted persons are not allowed to vote for members of Parliament. Voting is not compulsory.

Burmese elections practise the First-past-the-post voting system (winner takes all), in which the candidate who receives the highest number of votes is elected.

In the 2010 election, state media reported a voter turnout of 77.26%.

Advance voting was also widely practised, with military personnel and their family members, as well as civil servants, police force personnel and other state employees instructed to vote in advance.

This was in violation of the 2010 electoral laws, which only allow advance voting for eligible voters who are away from their constituencies as well as overseas Burmese citizens. In some constituencies, up to 95% of cast ballots were done in advance. An estimated 10% of votes (6 million) were cast in advance.

There were also reports of multiple voter fraud, voter manipulation, ghost voting and coerced voting, in which individuals were pressured to vote for Union Solidarity and Development Party candidates by officials.

Term

Chamber of Deputies (Pyithu Hluttaw) in Post-independence Burma

The two houses of the Pyidaungsu Hluttaw are simultaneously elected, with members of parliament (MPs) serving five year terms. Ministerial nominees, who are selected from the pool of elected MPs, vacate their parliamentary seats. By-elections, determined by the Union Election Commission, are held to elect these vacant seats.

The first regular session of the Pyidaungsu Hluttaw must be convened within 15 days of the commencement of the Pyithu Hluttaw's first session. At least one regular session must be held per year, and subsequent sessions must be held within 12 months of each other. Special or emergency sessions can be convened by the President. Parliamentary sessions are only valid if 25% or more MPs are present.

The first session of the Pyidaungsu Hluttaw was held from January to March 2011, while the second was held from 22 August 2011 to.

Journalists were not allowed to attend the first session. However, the Ministry of Information announced on 12 August 2011 that they would be permitted to attend the second session.

Politics of Myanmar

List of legislatures by country

State and Region Hluttaws

Official website of Pyithu Hluttaw

Archived

၂၀၁၉-၀၄-၂၁ at the

Wayback Machine

19°46 28 N

96°6 13 E

 / 

19.77444°N 96.10361°E

 /

19.77444; 96.10361

ကလေင်ကေတ်လဝ် နူ "

"