ဇမ္ၚောဲခြာ ညးပလုင်ၜါ (Two Distant Strangers)

ဇမ္ၚောဲခြာ ညးပလုင်ၜါ (Two Distant Strangers)

ဂှ်ဒှ် ရုပ်ဇာတ်ဒမျိုင် ဇမၠေအ် အမေရိကာန် ၂၀၂၀ မချူလဝ် နကဵု တြဝေါန် ဖြဳ (Travon Free) တုဲ ကၠောန်ပ္တိတ်လဝ် နကဵု ဒါရေက်ဒါ ရိသေ ကေုာံ မာတိန် ဒေသမောန် ရဝ် (Rice and Martin Desmond Roe)။

ရုပ်ဒမျိုင်ဏအ် ပၠုပ်လဝ်နာမ သွက် လာပ်အကဒေမဳ သွက်ရုပ်ဇာတ်ဒမျိုင်ဇမၠေအ် မခိုဟ်အိုတ် သၞာံ ၂၀၂၁ (2021 Academy Award for Best Live Action Short Film)။

သကေမ်

ပ္ဍဲဍုင်နျူယံက်၊ မၞိဟ်လမ္စံက် ဂြပ်ဖိစ် ဒဳဇြာင်နာ ကာတာ ဇောမ် (Carter James) ဂစာန်စဴ သ္ၚိ ဇရေင်ကၠဵုညးတေအ်၊ ဇေတာ၊ ပ္ဍဲအခိင်ဂယး ကြဴနူ ညးတေအ် အာတိက်ဇရေင် သ္ၚိကဝေင်ညး tries to get home to his dog, Jeter, the morning after a first date, only to find himself trapped in a time loop, in which he is repeatedly confronted in the street by a white NYPD officer, Officer Merk. Merk wonders whether Carter is smoking a joint and wants to search his bag. Each encounter ends with Carter being killed by the police, then waking up in the bed of his date, Perri. Carter's first death resembles the killing of Eric Garner ("I can't breathe") in 2014 and

George Floyd

in May 2020. Free wrote the script in August 2020. In one version of the loop, riot police burst into his date's apartment, mistaking it for a different apartment because the door number is hanging upside down, and shoot him there.

After about 100 deaths, Carter decides to discuss the situation with Officer Merk when he next encounters him. Carter describes the time loop, offering Merk evidence by predicting what people around them will do next. This time, Carter is shot by a separate group of officers. When they next meet, Carter asks Merk to drive him home. The journey ends without mishap; Merk and Carter get out of the patrol car and shake hands. But as Carter turns to enter his apartment building, Merk starts applauding what he calls Carter's performance "Bravo! ... best of the bunch" and shoots him again. Carter wakes up once more in his date's bed.

The film ends with Carter leaving his date's apartment to make yet another effort to get home: "Because it don't matter how long it takes, or how many times it takes, one way or another, I'm getting home to my fucking dog." As the song "The Way It Is" plays, the screen lists the names of black Americans who have died in encounters with police.

Cast

Joey Bada$$ as Carter James

Andrew Howard as Merk, an NYPD officer

Zaria Simone as Perri, Carter's date

Accolades

African-American Film Critics Association, Best Short Film (won)

Academy Award for Best Live Action Short Film nomination

ဆက်ဗှ်

Black Lives Matter

Woke

-TV series similar in content

12:01 PM

-1990 Oscar-nominated short similar in content

နိဿဲ

လေန် မ္ၚး

IMDb

Official trailer

Joey Bada$$ shakes 'up old trauma' in short film

(in en-US).

Dry, Jude (March 8, 2021).

 Two Distant Strangers Makes Sure Oscar Voters Don t Forget George Floyd

(in en).

Feinberg၊ Scott။ "

'Awards Chatter' Podcast Sean Combs ('Two Distant Strangers')

" (in en)၊ February 5, 2021။

ကလေင်ကေတ်လဝ် နူ "

"