သာဒ်ဂုရု

ဇဂ္ဂိ ဝိသုဒေဝ် (Jaggi Vasudev)

(သၠးဂၠံဂဝ် ၃ သေပ်တေမ်ပါ ၁၉၅၇) ဗွဲမဂၠိုင် ကော်စညး

သာဒ်ဂုရု

(

Sadhguru)

ဝွံ ဒှ်ယောဂဳ ဂကူအိန္ဒိယ ကေုာံ အစာချူလိက် ဒယှ်မွဲတၠရ။

ပ္ဍဲသၞာံ ၁၉၉၂ ဝသုဒေဝ် ခၞံဗဒှ် နိဓိဣရှ (ဣရှ ဖံင်ဒေရှေန် (Isha Foundation) တုဲ နကဵု ဖံင်ဒေရှေန်ဂှ် ချဳဓရာင် အရာဗွဲမဂၠိုင် ဗွဲတၟေင် မဆေင်ကဵု ပရေင်ဓရ်၊ ပရေင်ပညာ ကေုာံ ပရေင်သဘာဝဂမၠိုင်ရ။ ဂကောံဂှ် ဒးဒုင်စောဲဒုဟ် ကၠောန်ကမၠောန် ဟွံကိတ်ညဳသၞောဝ်အလဵုအသဳ ဗွဲတၟေင် ပ္ဍဲအရာ မဆေင်ကဵု ကမၠောန်မင်မဲသဘာဝ ဂြိုပ်ဆုတအ်ရ။ လညာတ်ဒဿန ပရေင်ဍုင်ကွာန်မၞိဟ် ဝိသုဒေဝ်ဂှ် ကြပ်ညောန် ကုဝါဒနေရဝ်လဳဗလဴဟိန္ဒူတွာ မဒှ်လညာတ် ပရေင်ဍုင်ကွာန် ဝါဒဗၠးၜး ကေုာံ သာသနာဟိန္ဒူရ။ လညာတ်ဝါဒဏအ်ဂှ် ဗော်ပရေင်ဍုင် ပ္ဍဲအိန္ဒိယ ဗော်ဘရတိယ ဇနတ (Bharatiya Janata Party) ဒ္ဂေတ်ဒၟံင်ရ။

ပ္ဍဲသၞာံ ၂၀၁၇ ညးကလိဂွံ တဆိပ်ကြာ ပဒၟ ဝိဘူသန နူကဵု အလဵုအသဳ အိန္ဒိယ ဟိုတ်နူညးမဂစာန်ကၠောန်လဝ် ပ္ဍဲလပါ် ပရေင်မၞိဟ်ရ။

အတ္ထုပ္ပတ္တိ

ပထမ အဝဲ ကေုာံ ပရေင်ပညာ

ၜံင် ပ္ဍဲ မာဲသဝ်ရေ (Mysore) ကာနတက (Karnataka) အိန္ဒိယ မိမမဟီုအရေဝ် တေလုဂု၊

ဇဂ္ဂိ ဝသုဒေဝ်ဝွံ ပၞောဝ်ကောန်ဇာတ်ပန်ဂှ် ဒှ်ကောန်ဍောတ်အိုတ် - ကောၜါ ၝောဲၜါ။ မိညးဂှ် ဒှ်သမ္ဘာသ္ၚိ (housewife) တုဲ အပါညးဂှ် ဒှ်အစာသဝ်မတ်ရ။

ဟိုတ်နူ အပါဂှ် ဒးပြံင်ဒၟံင် ဒၞာဲကမၠောန်မွဲခဏ မွဲခဏတုဲ ညးတေအ်လေဝ် ဒးပြံင်မံင်လဝ် ဒၞာဲဗွဲမဂၠိုင်ကီုရ။

ကြဴနူ မအံင်ဇၞးကေတ် တန်ကိုပ်ကၠာတက္ကသိုလ် ကဵု ကဝ်လိက် ပ္ဍဲမာဲသဝ်ရေတုဲ ညးဆက်တိုန် တက္ကသိုလ်မာဲသဝ်ရာ ကလိဂွံ ဒဳဂရဳဗာတ်ချ်လာ ဘာသာအင်္ဂလိက် ပ္ဍဲသၞာံ ၁၉၇၃ ရ။

ဝသုဒေဝ် ဟွံဆက်တိုန်ဘာဂတဂှ်တုဲ စၞးဂှ် ညးလုပ်ကၠောန် ကမၠောန်ပရေင်ပိုန်ဒြပ်ရ။

လညာတ်ပတှ်ေဘာသာ

ပ္ဍဲအခိင်ကာလ ညးကလိဂွံအာယုက် ၂၅ ပ္ဍဲကဵု ၂၃ သေပ်တေမ်ပါ ၁၉၈၂ ဝသုဒေဝ် တိုန်အာ ဇရေင်ကုန်ဒဵုဆမုန္ဒဳ (Chamundi Hill) တုဲ ဂ္ဇအ်ဒၟံင် လတူတၟအ်ဇၞော်မွဲရ။ ပ္ဍဲဒၞာဲဂှ် ညးကလိဂွံ ဒုင်စသိုင် မဆေင်ကဵုဘာသာရ။

ဂတဂှ် တြဴ သတ္တဟ၊ ညးပအပ်ထောအ် ပရေင်ပိုန်ဒြပ်ညး ကုရဲညးတုဲ ညးတိတ်တရဴ ဆက်ပၟဝ်ဓရ် သွက်ကလိဂွံ ပရေင်ဒုင်စသိုင် မဆေင် ကုဘာသာရ။ ကြဴနူ ညးဂဇအ်ဓရ် ကေုာံ တိတ်တရဴ ပွိုင်မွဲသၞာံတုဲ ညးဖျေဟ်သ္ဂုတ်သွာတ် သွက်ဂွံ ဗတောန်ယောကဳ/ ဖျေဟ်ဓရ် သွက်ဂွံ ပါ်ပရအ် အရာညးမတီကၠိုဟ်လဝ်ဂှ်ရ။

ပ္ဍဲသၞာံ ၁၉၈၃ ညးစပံက် တန်ယောကဳ ကိုပ်ကၠာအိုတ် ပ္ဍဲကဵု ဍုင်မာဲသဝ်ရေဂှ် မၞိဟ်တိုန်စိုပ် လုပ်ဂဇအ်ဓဝ် ထပှ်တၠရ။ ညးဆက်ပံက်အာ ပ္ဍဲဒေသနာနာ ပ္ဍဲကဵုကာနတက ကေုာံ ဟာဲဒေရဗာတ်၊ ဒဳအာ နကဵုကွဳလိုန်ဓါတ်တုဲ သြန်မကလိဂွံ နူတန်ဗတောန်ယောကဳတအ်ဂှ် ဗက်ကဵုဒါန် ကုဂကောံ မရီုဗင် ညးဒိုက်ဂတ်တအ်ရ။

သ္ၚိကၟိန်

ဇဂ္ဂဳ ဝသုဒေဝ် ပ္ဍဲဍုင် ဒဝေါသ်၊ သွိတ်သလာန် ပ္ဍဲသၞာံ ၂၀၀၇

ဇဂ္ဂဳ ဝသုဒေဝ် ကေင်ဖျေဟ်ဒၞာဲ ဒက်အိန်ထံင် ကုဝိဇယကုမာရဳ (သီု မကော်စ ဝိဇ္ဇဳ)ရ။ ညးဂှ် ဒှ်တၠသ္ၚိ ဝိဇယကုမာရဳ မရနုက်ကဵု ဒုတိယရ။ ကိုပ်ကၠာ ဝိဇယကုမာရဳ ဟွံစှ်ေဒၞာဲ ကုဇဂ္ဂိ ဝသုဒေဝ်ဏီဂှ် ညးကၠောန်ဒၟံင်ကမၠောန် ပ္ဍဲကဵု ဘာန်မွဲရ။ ညးတအ် ကလိဂွံ ကောန်ဝုတ်မွဲ မနွံယၟု ရဓေ (Radhe)။ ဝိဇယကုမာရဳ စုတိအာ ပ္ဍဲကဵုသၞာံ ၁၉၉၇။ ပ္ဍဲအခိင်ဂှ် အပါဝိဇယကုမာရဳ စုတ်စောဲဒုဟ် ကုဇဂ္ဂဳ ဒဒှ်ရ ညးတေအ် ဂစိုတ်ထောအ် ကောန်ဝုတ်ညးရ။ ဝသုဒေဝ် ဟီု အရာမစုတိဝွံ ဒှ်အရာ မဟာသမာဓိ တုဲ ညးဟီု ပရူဒဒှ်ဏအ်ဂှ် ဝိဇယ လဴလဝ် ကုညးတေအ် ကိုပ်ကၠာဟွံစုတိ ၜိုတ် တြဴဂိတုရ။

ၜိုန်ရ ညးတေအ်ဟီု သမ္ဘာညး လုပ်စ မဟာသမာဓိ ကီုလေဝ် နကဵု အခိုက်ဟိန္ဒူမ္ဂး ယဝ်ရ မၞိဟ်မွဲ လုပ်စသမာဓိတုဲ မစုတိမ္ဂး ဇွဂှ် သ္ဒးတိုပ်ဟေင်ရ။ ဆဂး စၞးမတိုပ်ဂှ် ညးစံင်ဇွ သမ္ဘာညးရ။ ဟိုတ်နူ ဗၠာဲသၟိင်တအ် ဟွံကလိဂွံ သက်သဳသာဓကတုဲ ဂဗုတ်ခမ်သဳညး မစောဲလဝ် ဒဒှ်ရ ညးဂစိုတ်ဗြဴညးဂှ် ဒးကၟာတ်ထောအ် အတိုင်ဂှ်ရ။

ကောန်ဝုတ် ဝိသုဒေဝ် ရဓေ ဂှ် ဒှ်သၟာလှ်ေမွဲရ။ သၟတ်ဗြဴဂှ် စှ်ေဒၞာဲ ဒက်အိန်ထံင် ကုသၟာဒယှ်ေဒွက်ဒယှ် သာန်ဒိပ် နရယာန် (Sandeep Narayan) ပ္ဍဲသၞာံ ၂၀၁၄ ပ္ဍဲကဵု ဇြပ်သဘင်ဓရ် ဝသုဒေဝ် ပ္ဍဲဍုင်ကောမ်ဗတောရ်တုဲ ပ္ဍဲပေါဲမ္ၚဵုထပ်တဲဂှ် မၞိဟ်ဗွဲမဂၠိုင် တိုန်စိုပ်လဝ်ရ။

လိက် ကေုာံ တဝဟ်

ဇဂ္ဂဳ ဝသုဒေဝ်ဂှ် ဒှ်အစာကဝိ လိက်ဗွဲမဂၠိုင်ရ။ လိက်ညး

Inner Engineering: A Yogi's Guide to Joy

(စက်ယာဉ်ခန္ဓ - ဂၠံင်တရဴယောဂဳ သွက်တသိုက်)

ဂှ် ဒှ်လိက် လိက်ပရိုင် The New York Times မပၠုပ်စရင် လိက်မသွံခိုဟ်အိုတ် ပ္ဍဲကဵုဂကူလိက်ကဏ္ဍနာနာရ။

တုဲပၠန် လိက်မၞိဟ်မတီဂၠိုင် လိက်

Mystic's Musings

ကေုာံ လိက်

Death: An Inside Story

ဂှ်လေဝ် ဒှ်လိက် ညးမချူလဝ်ကီုရ။

ဝသုဒေဝ်ဂှ် ဒှ်အစာဓရ်ဒယှ် မတွဟ်ဓရ် နကဵုဘာသာအင်္ဂလိက်မွဲတုဲ မဂွံဒုင်ဘိက် ဟီုတွဟ် ပ္ဍဲကဵုဝိုင်ဂၠးတိဇၞော်ဇၞော် ဗီုကဵု ပ္ဍဲကဵု သဘင်ကောံဓရီုသၟိင်တၠဍုင်ဂမၠိုင် ကုလသမဂ္ဂ မဆေင်ကဵု ဓဝ်ၜိုဟ်လလံ (United Nation's Millennium World Peace Summit)၊ စၠတ်ထဝ်သၟိင်တၠ (House of Lords)၊ အေန်သတဳကျုတ် နဲပညာ မာသေချူသေတ် (Massachusetts Institute of Technology)၊ ကေုာံ အေန်သတဳကျုတ် ရးဍုင်နာနာ သွက် ပရေင်ဇၞော်မောဝ် နဲကဲပကင်ရင် (International Institute for Management Development)တအ်ရ။

ပ္ဍဲကဵု ဝှဝ်ရာံပရေင်ပိုန်ဒြပ်ဂၠးကဝ် (World Economic Forum) ပ္ဍဲသၞာံ ၂၀၀၇၊

၂၀၁၇ ကေုာံ ၂၀၂၀ ဂှ်လေဝ် ညးဂွံဘိက်တိုန် ဟီုတွဟ်ကီုရ။

အဲပရဲ

Pranab Mukherjee

presenting the

Padma Vibhushan

to Vasudev at the

Rashtrapati Bhavan

in New Delhi on April 13, 2017

ဝသုဒေဝ် ဂွံဒုင် ဇိုန်နှင် လာပ်ပဒၟ ဝိဘုရှာန် (Padma Vibhushan)၊ မဒှ်လာပ်မဇိုန်နှင် ကုကောန်မၞိဟ် သၠုင်အိုတ်-ဒုတိယ နူကဵုအလဵုအသဳ အိန္ဒိယ ပ္ဍဲသၞာံ ၂၀၁၇ ဟိုတ်မပစၟတ်သမ္တီကမၠောန်ပတန်သာသနာညးရ။

ပ္ဍဲကဵု (The Indian Express) မကၠောန်ပ္တိတ် စရင်ဂကူအိန္ဒိယ မၞိဟ်အဝဵုသြဇာဇၞော်အိုတ် ၁၀၀ တၠဂှ် ညးနွံ ပ္ဍဲကဵု စရင်မရနုက်ကဵု ၉၂။ ပ္ဍဲသၞာံ ၂၀၁၂ စရင်ဂကူအိန္ဒိယ မၞိဟ်အဝဵုသြဇာဇၞော်အိုတ် ၅၀ တၠဂှ် ညးနွံ ပ္ဍဲ မရနုက်ကဵု ၄၀ ပ္ဍဲသၞာံ ၂၀၁၉။

ဣရှ ဖံင်ဒေရှေန် (Isha Foundation)

ဇဂ္ဂဳ ဝသုဒေဝ် ဒက်ပ္တန် ဣရှ ဖံင်ဒေရှေန် နဒဒှ် ဂကောံစေတနာ ဗဒါဲကောမ်ဗတောရ် (Coimbatore) ပ္ဍဲသၞာံ ၁၉၉၂။

ကမၠောန်ဖံင်ဒေရှေန် မကၠောန် ဗွဲမဂၠိုင်ဂှ် ဒးဒုင်စောဲ မဒှ်ကမၠောန် မဗၠေတ် ကုသၞောဝ်ဍုင် ဂၠိုင်ကဵုအလန်ရ။

ယောဂ

အစဳအဇန် ယောဂ

Jaggi Vasudev conducting the Inner Engineering Program at the Bombay Stock Exchange

ကြဴနူ မဒက်ပတန် ဇြပ်သဘင်ဓရ်တုဲ ဝသုဒေဝ် စပံက်ဓရ် အစဳအဇန်ယောဂ ပ္ဍဲကဵု ဇြပ်ယောဂဣရှ (Isha Yoga Center) ပ္ဍဲသၞာံ ၁၉၉၄၊ သီုကဵု တန်ဗတောန် သွက် ဂကောံဝေင်ဓတ်ဟံက်ကဳ အိန္ဒိယ (Indian Hockey team) ပ္ဍဲသၞာံ ၁၉၉၆ ရ။

ပ္ဍဲ ၁၉၉၇ ညးစပံက်တန်ဗတောန် ပ္ဍဲကၟိန်ဍုင်အမေရိကာန်

တုဲ စနူ ၁၉၉၈ စဵုကဵုလၟုဟ် ပံက်ကဵု တန်ဗတောန် သွက်ကောန်ထံင် မဒးဒုင်ဖျေဟ်ထံင် မွဲဇမၠိင်အာယုက် ပ္ဍဲကဵု ထံင်တမိလ်နဒူ ဂမၠိုင်ရ။

အစဳအဇန် မၞိဟ်မတီဂၠိုင်အိုတ်ဂှ် ဒှ်အစဳအဇန် နကဵုက္ဍိုပ်လိက် 'Inner Engineering (ဗဂေတ်စက် အပ္ဍဲခန္ဓ)' မဒှ်အစဳအဇန် မတွဟ်ထ္ၜးကဵု မၞိဟ်တအ် ဗီုမဂွံဂဇအ်ဓရ်ယောဂ ကေုာံ သံဘဝိ မဟာမုဒြာ (

Shambhavi Mahamudra

)

မဒှ် အစဳအဇန် မဟီုတွဟ် သၟာန်သွဟ် မဆေင်ကဵု ဓရ်ရ။

It views depression as the result of a false widespread belief about an ability to change the world according to one s desires, and offers to teach the technology of mental well-being, to help one acclimatize with unavoidable work rigors.

Vasudev has frequently cited a study by the University of California which supposedly found mahamudra to lead to highly elevated levels (221%) of neuronal regeneration in the brain; it has since been noted that the study appeared in a fringe journal published by a discredited alternative medicine advocate and his allies, and that it merely reports lower levels of subjective stress from a medium-sized uncontrolled group practicing yoga daily for six weeks.

ဓျာန လိင်္ဂ

The Dhyanalinga (composed of the terms

dhyāna

and

linga

) is a consecrated sculptural stone structure standing 4.3 metres (13 feet 9 inches) tall.

Its creation and consecration, according to Vasudev, was his life's mission entrusted to him by his guru.

In 1998, the structure of the Dhyanalinga was ordered and arrived at the ashram, where the Dhyanalinga Yogic Temple was being built to hold it.

After three years of work, the temple was completed on 23 June 1999

and opened to the public on 23 November.

As a meditative space the Dhyanalinga Yogic Temple is not dedicated to any particular faith or belief system

and is open to all visitors irrespective of their religion or nationality.

A stone pillar named the Sarva Dharma stambha, located at the temple's front entrance, has religious symbols of several religions carved on to it to denote universal brotherhood.

ပဋိမာရုပ် အဒိယောဂဳ သဳဝ

Adiyogi Shiva statue

Designed by Vasudev, the foundation built a 112-feet-tall and 500 tonnes (490 long tons; 550 short tons) Shiva statue for inspiring and promoting yoga. It was inaugurated by the Prime Minister of India, Narendra Modi

and has been recognized as the "Largest Bust Sculpture" by Guinness World Records.

The Tamil Nadu government has since claimed the entire construction as illegal, for which no approval was granted;

Comptroller and Auditor General's report further states the construction to have flagrantly violated the rules of biodiversity zones.

Other consecrations

Vasudev regularly conducts gatherings (

mahasathsangs

) in the Indian states of Tamil Nadu and Karnataka.

He also takes spiritual aspirants on annual pilgrimages (

yatras

) to Mount Kailash and the Himalayas.

Every year at the Isha Yoga Center, Vasudev celebrates an all-night Mahashivarathri, the annual Hindu festival in honour of Shiva. It is estimated that these celebrations were attended by as many as 800,000 people in 2013.

ဣရှ ဝိဓျာ Isha Vidhya

Isha Vidhya, an education initiative, aims to raise the level of education and literacy in rural India by providing quality English-language-based, computer-aided education. There are seven Isha Vidhya Schools in operation which educate around 3,000 students.

Environmental initiatives

Project GreenHands

Saplings being readied for transportation at a PGH nursery.

Project GreenHands (PGH) was established in 2004 as an environmental organization. Its activity is largely focused on Tamil Nadu. The organization received the Indira Gandhi Paryavaran Puraskar, the Government of India's environmental award in 2010. The organisation's activities include agroforestry, plant nurseries in schools,

and tree-planting in urban centers such as Tiruchirappalli

and Tiruppur.

Rally for Rivers

The Rally for Rivers campaign, which ran from September to October 2017,

intended to rejuvenate India's depleting rivers by growing large forests along their banks. Promoted by Vasudev all over the country, the campaign received support from a broad range of celebrities and the urban populace.

MOUs were signed with state governments.

However, the campaign has been widely criticized by environmentalists for lacking in scientific basis and shifting the spotlight away from real concerns. Acclaimed water conservationist Rajendra Singh alleges that the campaign is motivated by the goal of money and fame.

Cauvery Calling

The project intends to support farmers in planting an estimated 2.4 billion trees through agroforestry and simultaneously cover one third of Cauvery basin with trees, as a means of conserving it.

The campaign got popular appreciation from politicians and film fraternity; however, environmentalists and public intellectuals rejected the claims, asserting that the program presented a simplistic view of river conservation, especially without accounting for social issues and had a potential to harm the tributaries and accompanying wild life habitats.

A Public Interest litigation has been also filed in the Karnataka High Court questioning the huge amounts of fundraising for the movement and the usage of government owned land for a private purpose without any proper study.

Books and public engagement

Jaggi Vasudev is the author of several books. His

Inner Engineering: A Yogi's Guide to Joy

appeared in <i id="mwASU">The New York Times</i> Best Seller list in the "Health",

"Religion, Spirituality and Faith",

and "Advice, How-To & Miscellaneous" categories.

Vasudev has been invited as a speaker at the India Economic Summit of the annual World Economic Forum event in 2007

, 2017 and 2020.

Politics, religion and pseudoscience

Critics note that Vasudev shares the sociopolitical ideology of Bharatiya Janata Party and Hindutva.

He plays a vital role in Indian right-wing politics, using his suave and seemingly apolitical guru persona to spread an exclusionary brand of non-secular ethno-nationalism to an urban audience.

He advocates a total ban on cow slaughter and deems the Muslim Rule in India as centuries of "oppressive occupation", which were far worse than the British Raj.

Vasudev has also spoken in favour of the 2019 Balakot airstrike, introduction of a comprehensive GST and Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2019 whilst deeming the Thoothukudi protests as lynching of corporate industries.

In an interview before Times Now, Vasudev had blamed the left liberal sections of the society for facilitating militancy in Kashmir and lamented about how Kanhaiya Kumar and Umar Khalid (of JNU sedition row fame) were hogging the public limelight instead of being behind the bars.

His understanding of realpolitik and history, as displayed in delivering these stances has been widely criticized.

Vasudev has also been noted as a longstanding purveyor of pseudo-scientific information across a spectrum of topics, aligning to a politico-religious model.

In 2015, he propagated long-debunked superstitions in his blog, about food turning poisonous and human health being adversely affected during lunar eclipse; the post has been since been broadcast across multiple mainstream media, for years; over a public discourse, he used a rudraksha garland as an 'energy' measuring device to prove his claim.

AltNews has documented Vasudev to have perpetuated numerous myths around clinical depression; he had also protested against a potential prohibition on the use of mercury for Indian traditional medicines, despite its extreme toxicity which can lead to death.

His views on the Higgs boson and alleged benefits for the Vibhuti have been refuted by the rationalists and have been labelled as anti-scientific.

In a talk delivered at IIT Madras, he propounded debunked theories about water memory.

Shashi Tharoor has noted about how the ideology of Hindutva has encouraged gurus to blend religion and pseudo-spirituality into a lucrative business to promote irrationality.

Another piece over Scroll.in, on similar veins, documented Vasudev's casting of religious politics into a meta-scientific narrative and popularization of a Hindutva-centered revisionist history featuring atavistic remembrances of a golden Hindu past; among others it consisted fundamental mis-interpretation of Darwin's work followed by appropriating it as something that has been long discovered in India, advocating for Hindu rituals after death since it spared a slow death (as allegedly justifiable from the continued growth of nail and hairs) and claiming of Hindu Tantric 'scientists' being capable of resurrecting the dead by citing the anecdote.

Babu Gogineni deemed of him as a spiritualist conman, who built a huge business empire by resorting to a mixture of pseudo-science with science, rather than old age magic tricks which were increasingly getting debunked.

Honors

Pranab Mukherjee presenting the Padma Vibhushan to Vasudev at the Rashtrapati Bhavan in New Delhi on April 13, 2017

Vasudev received the Padma Vibhushan, the second-highest civilian award from the Government of India in 2017 in recognition of his contribution to the field of spirituality.

Critics have opined it to be politically motivated in light of his support of political stances by Bharatiya Janata Party and overall ideological inclination towards Hindutva.

He stood 92nd in The Indian Express' list of 100 most powerful Indians, in 2012.

Notes

Bibliography

Berghella, Vincenzo (2018), Chennai and Coimbatore, India,

ISBN 978-0-578-20085-9

Simone, Cheryl; Vasudev, Sadhguru Jaggi (2008), Midnights with the Mystic: A Little Guide to Freedom and Bliss, Hampton Roads Publishing,

ISBN 978-1-61283-113-8

Waghorne, Joanne Punzo (2013), "Engineering an Artful Practice: On Jaggi Vasudev's Isha Yoga and Sri Sri Ravi Shankar's Art of Living", in Mark Singleton; Ellen Goldberg (eds.), Gurus of Modern Yoga, Oxford University Press, pp. 283 307,

ISBN 978-0-19-993872-8

Isha Foundation's official website

ကလေင်ကေတ်လဝ် နူ "

"