ပၞောဝ်ကဵု တိုက်ဂမၠိုင် ပ္ဍဲဂၠးတိဏအ် တိုက်အာဖရိကဂှ် ဗွဲသၟဟ် မၞိဟ်အာယုက်ဍောတ်အိုတ်၊
[၅][၆] အာယုက်လဒေါဝ် (median age) ပ္ဍဲသၞာံ ၂၀၁၂ ဂှ် နွံ ၁၉.
၇ သၞာံ မဒှ်အခိင် အာယုက်လဒေါဝ် အလုံလိုက်ဂှ် နွံ ၃၀.
[၇] ဍုင်အာလ်ဂျေရဳယျာ ဂှ် နကဵု ဗွိုက်ဨရိယာမ္ဂး ဒှ်ဍုင် ဇၞော်အိုတ် ပ္ဍဲအာဖရိကတုဲ နကဵုလၟိဟ်မၞိဟ်မ္ဂး ဍုင် နိဂေရဳယျာဂှ် ဇၞော်အိုတ် (ဝါ) ဒှ်ဍုင် မၞိဟ်ဂၠိုင်အိုတ်ရ။
အာဖရိက ဗွဲတၟေင် ပ္ဍဲကဵု လဒေါဝ်ဗွဲဒိုဟ်ဗမံက်ဂှ် တၠပညာဗွဲမဂၠိုင် ဒုင်တဲ တုပ်စိုတ် မဒှ်ဒၞာဲ ကောန်မၞိဟ် ကေုာံ ကၞုဲဗဳဇမနုဿ ကတဵုဒှ်ကၠာအိုတ် နကဵု သက်သဳသာဓက မဂၠာဲဆဵုကေတ် ဇုတ်ဇုဇဗဴဇ ဗဳဇကောန်မၞိဟ် နူကဵုသၞာံ ၜိုတ် ၇ မဳလဳယာန်သၞာံ မတုဲကၠုင် သီုကဵု Sahelanthropus tchadensis,
Australopithecus africanus,
afarensis,
Homo erectus,
habilis ကေုာံ H.
ergaster ကၠာအိုတ် Homo sapiens (modern human) တအ်ဂှ် ဂွံဆဵုကေတ် ပ္ဍဲအဳတဳအဝ်ပဳယျာ စၟတ်သမ္တီလဝ် သၞာံ ၜိုတ် 200,
000 သၞာံမတုဲကၠုင်တေအ်ရ။
[၈] Africa straddles the equator and encompasses numerous climate areas;
it is the only continent to stretch from the northern temperate to southern temperate zones.
[၉] Africa hosts a large diversity of ethnicities,
cultures and languages.
In the late 19th century,
European countries colonised almost all of Africa;
most present states in Africa emerged from a process of decolonisation in the 20th century.
African nations cooperate through the establishment of the African Union,
which is headquartered in Addis Ababa.
Under Roman rule,
Carthage became the capital of the province it then named Africa Proconsularis,
following its defeat of the Carthaginians in the Third Punic War in 146 BC,
which also included the coastal part of modern Libya.
[၁၆] The Latin suffix -ica can sometimes be used to denote a land (e.
in Celtica from Celtae,
as used by Julius Caesar).
The later Muslim region of Ifriqiya,
following its conquest of the Byzantine (Eastern Roman) Empire's Exarchatus Africae,
also preserved a form of the name.
According to the Romans,
Africa lay to the west of Egypt,
while "Asia" was used to refer to Anatolia and lands to the east.
A definite line was drawn between the two continents by the geographer Ptolemy (85 165 AD),
indicating Alexandria along the Prime Meridian and making the isthmus of Suez and the Red Sea the boundary between Asia and Africa.
As Europeans came to understand the real extent of the continent,
the idea of "Africa" expanded with their knowledge.
Other etymological hypotheses have been postulated for the ancient name "Africa":