မကၠဵု၊ တၞမ်

ယၟုသိပ္ပံ Terminalia bellirica ၊ ယၟုဝံသ Combretaceae.

မကၠဵု

ဘာသာဂကူသ္အာင်မၞုံယၟုတၞဟ်တၞဟ် မပ္တမ်

bahera

or

beleric

or

bastard myrobalan

, (Arabic: beliledj بليلج, Sanskrit: Bibhitaka बिभीतक, Aksha

अक्ष

),

မဒှ်ဂကူတၞံဆုဇၞော် ပရဟ်တၞး ဂွံဆဵုညာတ်ဒၟံင်ပ္ဍဲတိဗလး တိကုန်ဒဵု ပ္ဍဲဒေသအာရှအဂၞဲ Southeast Asia, လ္ၚဵုဂှ်တဵုလဝ်ဇိုင်ဂၠံင် လေဝ်နွံ။

ဂုန်သတ်မကၠဵုပၠန်တုန် - သတ်မကၠဵုသွတ်တ်(ၜတ်တ်) ရှ်ဍေံဖျးက္တင် ဍေံပၠေင်ကၠေံယဲကျာ ၊ သတ်မကၠဵုတမြံင် ရှ်ဍေံဍာတ်ဖျိုတ် ဍေံပၠေင်ကၠေံယဲမတ်၊ ဍေံပၠေင်ကၠေံယဲဓါတ်ကလိုက်ကမဵု၊ ဍေံပၠေင်ကၠေံဇွဟ်၊ ဍေံဗဂဵုကဵုပၟတ်ဂၞဴ၊ ဍေံပၠေင်ကၠေံယဲသောထော၊ ဖ္ဍန်မအပ္ဍဲအိုတ်ဂှ်ဍေံလေပ်ပၠေင်ကၠေံယဲဂကိတ်မအာညံင်ဍာ်ပုင်ဂှ်ပၠေင်ကဵု၊ သၠမကၠဵုဍေံပၠေင်ကဵုယဲသြမစပ်ကဵုစမှ၊ ပ္ကဴမကၠဵုဂှ်ဍေံပၠေင်ကဵုယဲမတ်စာင်စပ်၊ သ္ကောဝ်မကၠဵုဂှ်ဍေံလေပ်ပၠေင်ကၠေံယဲဂြိုဟ်နှဳ(ဇြိဟ်နှဳ) ၊ ရိုဟ်မကၠဵုဂှ်ဍေံလေပ်ပၠေင်ကၠေံဆီဂမ္တဴ ဂုန်တၞံမကၠဵု သတ်မကၠဵုတုဲဆဝွံရ။

တၞးမကၠဵုဂၠိင်ဗၞတ် 15 သေန်တဳမဳတာ တုဲကောံစိုက်ဒၟံင်ပ္ဍဲကၞောတ်တၞာင်ဍေံ၊ တၞးမကၠဵုဒှ်စၞတဲခိုဟ်သွက်ဂွံဗ္စဂၠဴ၊ မအပ္ဍဲသတ်မကၠဵုဂှ်ဒှ်ကၠေင် 40%, ကၠေင် fatty-acid methyl ester နူမကၠဵုဂှ်ပၟိက်ဇၞော်သွက်ဂွံကၠောန်ကၠေင် biodiesel ပ္ဍဲဍုင်အမေရိက US (ASTM D 6751-02, ASTM PS 121-99), ဍုင်ဂျာမနဳ Germany (DIN V 51606) ကေုာံ သမဂ္ဂယူရောပ် European Union (EN 14214).

မအပ္ဍဲသတ်ဍေံဂှ် ကော်ဂး

bedda nuts

.

ပ္ဍဲဍုင်အိန္ဒိယ စကာသတ်မကၠဵုပ္ဍဲဂြန်ဂဥုဲဗွဲမသၠဲလး မပ္တမ် Ayurvedic medicine, Beleric is known as "Bibhitaki" (Marathi: "Behada or Bhenda") (

Terminalia bellirica

). Its fruit is used in the popular Indian herbal rasayana treatment triphala. မကၠဵုဘာသာသံသကြိုတ် Sanskrit ကော်ဂး

bibhītaka

बिभीतक. ဒၞာဲသတ်မကၠဵုတိတ်ဂၠိုင်အိုတ် သီုဒှ်ပၞိဟ်(ဗဟဵု)သွံရာန်သတ်မကၠဵုပ္ဍဲဍုင်အိန္ဒိယ Neemuch (A Town in Malwa Region of Madhya Pradesh) is a major trading centre of De-Skinned Baheda & Whole Fruits of Terminalia Bellirica . Terminalia Bellirica is widely collected in wild in Malwa region of Madhya Pradesh and is traded in Neemuch APMC Yard.

According to Dymock, Warden, Hooper: Pharmacographia Indica 1890 :

"This tree, in Sanskrit Bibhita and Bibhitaka (fearless), is avoided by the Hindus of Northern India, who will not sit in its shade, as it is supposed to be inhabited by demons. Two varieties of T. belerica are found in India, one with nearly globular fruit, 1/2 to 3/4 inch in diameter, the other with ovate and much larger fruit. The pulp of the fruit (Beleric myrobalan) is considered by ayurvedic physicians to be astringent and laxative, and is prescribed with salt and long pepper in infections of the throat and chest. As a constituent of the triphala (three fruits), i.e., emblic, beleric and chebulic myrobalans, it is employed in a great number of diseases, and the kernel is sometimes used as an external application to inflamed parts. On account of its medicinal properties the tree bears the Sanskrit synonym of Anila-ghnaka, or "wind-killing." According to the Nighantus the kernels are narcotic."

In the Charaka Samhita, the ancient Ayurvedic text, Bibhitaki fruits are mentioned as having qualities to alleviate disease, and bestow longevity, intellectual prowess and strength. There are several "rasaayan" described in the Charaka Samhita, that use Bibhitaki.

Description of Fourth Amalaka Rasaayan, which includes Bibhitaki as one of the fruits:

By this treatment, the sages regained youthfulness and attained disease-free life of many hundred years, and endowed with the strength of physique, intellect and senses, practiced penance with utmost devotion.

This kernels are eaten by the Lodha people of the Indian subcontinent for their mind-altering qualities.

The nuts of the tree are rounded but with five flatter sides. It seems to be these nuts that are used as dice in the epic poem Mahabharata and in Rigveda book 10 hymn 34. A handful of nuts would be cast on a gaming board and the players would have to call whether an odd or even number of nuts had been thrown.

In the Nala, King Rituparna demonstrates his ability to count large numbers instantaneously by counting the number of nuts on an entire bough of a tree.

လမဳဆုမကၠဵု Trunk of

T. bellirica

သတ်မကၠဵု Fruit of

T. bellirica

သတ်မကၠဵုပြဟ်စှ်ေတုဲ A fallen fruit

လိက်နိဿဲလဝ်ဂမၠိုင်

အဆက်လပါ်မ္ၚး

Caldecott, Todd (2006).

Ayurveda: The Divine Science of Life

. Elsevier/Mosby.

ISBN 0-7234-3410-7

။

Contains a detailed monograph on Terminalia belerica (Bibhitaki) as well as a discussion of health benefits and usage in clinical practice. Available online at

ကလေင်ကေတ်လဝ် နူ "

"