ဝေါလောဒိမဳရ် ဇြေလေန်သကဳ

Script error: The function "infoboxTemplate" does not exist.

ဝေါလောဒိမဳရ် ဇြေလေန်သကဳ

(Volodymyr Oleksandrovych Zelenskyy) (ယူကြိန် Bолодимир Олександрович Зеленський) ၜံင် ၂၅ ဇာန်နဝါရဳ ၁၉၇၈) ဝွံ ဒှ် သၟာပရေင်ဍုင်ကွာန် ယူကြိန်၊ သၟာဇာတ် (actor) ကေုာံ သၟာဂရိုင် တြေံ၊

တုဲ ဒှ်သမတ ဍုင်ယူကြိန် မရနုက်ကဵု တြဴ ကေုာံ ပစ္စုပ္ပန်။

ဇြေလေန်သကဳ က္တဵုဒှ်မၞိဟ် ကေုာံ ဇၞော်ဂေါဝ်ကၠုင် နဒဒှ်မၞိဟ်မဟီုအရေဝ်ရုရှာ ပ္ဍဲကဵု ဍုင် ကြဳဝဳ ရိ (Kryvyi Rih), မဒှ် ဍုင်ဇၞော် ပ္ဍဲကဵု ရးဒၞိပြောပေတြောဝိသ် (Dnipropetrovsk Oblast) မနွံ ဒေသလဒေါဝ် ယူကြိန်ရ။ ညးဝွံ ၜိုန်ရ မဒှ်သၟာဇာတ် ကေုာံ သၟာဂရိုင်ကီုလေဝ် ညးဂှ် ဒှ်မၞိဟ်မတုဲလဝ် ဘာဥပဒေ နူကဵု တက္ကသိုလ်ပရေင်ပိုန်ဒြပ်ကောန်ဂကူ ကဳဝ်K (yiv National Economic University) ရ။ ညးဘာတုဲ နူတက္ကသိုလ်ဂှ်တုဲ ညးကၠောန်ကမၠောန် နဒဒှ်မၞိဟ်ဂရိုင် တုဲပၠန် ဒက်ပ္တန် ကမ္မဏဳ (Kvartal 95) မကၠောန်ပ္တိတ် ရုပ်ဒမျိုင်၊ ကာတောန် ကေုာံ အစဳအဇန်တဳဝဳ သီုကဵု ဇာတ်သဳရဳတဳဝဳ မနွံယၟု ဍိက်ညးဍုင်ကွာန် (Servant of the People (TV series)) မဒှ်ဇာတ် ဇြေလေန်သကဳ မချဳဓရာင် နဒဒှ် သမတယူကြိန်ရ။ သဳရဳဂှ် ဗလးပတိတ် ပ္ဍဲတဳဝဳ နူသၞာံ ၂၀၁၅ စဵုကဵု သၞာံ ၂၀၁၉ တုဲ နူစပ္တိတ်ဂှ် မြဟ် မၞိဟ်ဒးစိုတ်ဂၠိုင်ရ။

ဇြေလေန်သကဳ လလောင်တြး ဒဒှ်ရ ညးလုပ်ဒုင်ရုဲမာဲ ပ္ဍဲသဘင်မာဲသမတဍုင်ယူကြိန် သၞာံ ၂၀၁၉ ပ္ဍဲကဵု တ္ၚဲဗတံသၞာံတၟိ (၃၁ ဒဳဇြေမ်ဗါ ၂၀၁၈) အဃော သမတပေတြော ပဝ်ရဝ်ရှေန်ကဝ် မကဵုဒၟံင် သြဝါဒသၞာံတၟိ ပ္ဍဲကဵု တဳဝဳရ။ နူစ ညးမလလောင်တြးဂှ် ညးဂွံလုပ် ပ္ဍဲကဵု ဂကောံအလံင်သမတ မၞိဟ်မဒးစိုတ်ဂၠိုင်ဂှ်ရ။ ညးဂွံဇၞးကေတ် သဘင်မာဲ နကဵု ၇၃,၂% ပ္ဍဲအခိင်မရုဲစှ် ဗဂေတ်ဒုတိယတုဲ ဂွံဇၞးကေတ် သမတပဝ်ရဝ်ှေန်ကဝ်ရ။ အလဵုဇကုညးတေအ်ဂှ် ညးတေအ် ဒုင်ကေတ် နဒဒှ် မၞိဟ်မအာဂတ သွက် ဒစဵုဒစးဟွံဂံင်ပြံင်လှာဲ (anti-establishment) ကဵု ဒစဵုဒစး-အာဂတိ (anti-corruption)ရ။

ပ္ဍဲအခိင် ညးမဒှ်ဒၟံင် သမတဂှ် ညးဂွံစၟတ်သမ္တီ မၞိဟ်ထံက်ဂလာန် အလဵုအသဳ-အဳ

e-government

ကေုာံ မၞိဟ်ဒက်ပတန် ဓဝ်ညဳသာ အကြာ ကောန်ဍုင်ကွာန် မဟီုအရေဝ်ယူကြိန် ကဵု အရေဝ်ရုရှာတအ်ရ။

ညးဂှ် ဒှ်မၞိဟ်မစကာ သဵုရှေယ်မဳဒဳယာ နကဵုဂုဏ်ဖိုလ်နွံနွံမွဲတၠတုဲ ညးစကာ Instagram ဂၠိုင်ရ။

ဗော်ညး ဂွံဇၞးကေတ် သဘင်မာဲစၠတ်ထဝ်ယူကြိန် သၞာံ ၂၀၁၉ အလုံမွဲဍုင်ရ။ ပ္ဍဲအခိင် ညးမဂွံအဝဵုဍုင်ဂှ် During his administration, Zelenskyy oversaw the lifting of legal immunity for members of the

Verkhovna Rada

,

the country's response to the COVID-19 pandemic

and

subsequent economic recession

, and some progress in tackling

corruption in Ukraine

.

Critics of Zelenskyy claim that, in taking power away from

Ukrainian oligarchs

, he has sought to centralise authority and strengthen his personal position.

Zelenskyy promised to end

Ukraine's protracted conflict with Russia

as part of his presidential campaign, and attempted to engage in dialogue with Russian president

Vladimir Putin

.

Zelenskyy's administration faced

an escalation of tensions with Russia

in 2021, culminating in the launch of

an ongoing full-scale Russian invasion in February 2022

. Zelenskyy's strategy during the Russian military buildup was to calm the Ukrainian populace and assure the international community that Ukraine was not seeking to retaliate.

He initially distanced himself from warnings of an imminent war, while also calling for security guarantees and military support from

NATO

to "withstand" the threat.

After the commencement of the invasion, Zelenskyy declared

martial law across Ukraine

and a general mobilisation of the armed forces. His leadership during the crisis won him widespread international admiration, and he has been described as a symbol of Ukrainian resistance.

Early life

Volodymyr Oleksandrovych Zelenskyy was born to

Jewish

parents on 25 January 1978 in

Kryvyi Rih

, then in the

Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic

.

His father,

Oleksandr Zelenskyy

, is a professor and the head of the Department of Cybernetics and Computing Hardware at the

Kryvyi Rih State University of Economics and Technology

; his mother, Rymma Zelenska, used to work as an engineer.

His grandfather, Semyon (Simon) Ivanovych Zelenskyy, served as Infantry reaching the rank of

Colonel

the

Red Army

(in the

57th Guards Motor Rifle Division

)

during

World War II

; Semyon's father and three brothers were murdered in

the Holocaust

.

Prior to starting elementary school, Zelenskyy lived for four years in the Mongolian city of

Erdenet

, where his father worked.

Zelenskyy grew up speaking Russian.

Volodymyr Zelenskyy's father was a computer scientist, and his mother was an engineer.

At the age of 16, he passed the

Test of English as a Foreign Language

and received an education grant to study in Israel, but his father did not allow him to go.

He later earned a law degree from the

Kryvyi Rih Institute of Economics

, then a department of

Kyiv National Economic University

and now part of

Kryvyi Rih National University

, but did not go on to work in the legal field.

Entertainment career

At age 17, he joined the local

KVN

(a comedy competition) team and was soon invited to join the united Ukrainian team "Zaporizhia-Kryvyi Rih-Transit" which performed in the KVN's Major League and eventually won in 1997.

That same year, he created and headed the Kvartal 95 team which later transformed into the comedy outfit Kvartal 95. From 1998 to 2003, Kvartal 95 performed in the Major League and the highest open Ukrainian league of KVN, the team members spent a lot of the time in Moscow and constantly toured around

post-Soviet countries

.

In 2003, Kvartal 95 started producing TV shows for the Ukrainian TV channel

1+1

, and in 2005, the team moved to fellow Ukrainian TV channel

Inter

.

In 2008, he starred in the feature film

Love in the Big City

, and its sequel,

Love in the Big City 2

.

Zelenskyy continued his movie career with the film

Office Romance. Our Time

in 2011 and with

Rzhevsky Versus Napoleon

in 2012.

Love in the Big City 3

was released in January 2014.

Zelenskyy also played the leading role in the 2012 film

8 First Dates

and in sequels which were produced in 2015 and 2016.

He recorded the voice of

Paddington Bear

in the Ukrainian

dubbing

of

Paddington

(2014) and

Paddington 2

(2017).

Zelenskyy in Prague in 2009

Zelenskyy was a member of the board and the general producer of the TV channel

Inter

from 2010 to 2012.

In August 2014, Zelenskyy spoke out against the intention of the

Ukrainian Ministry of Culture

to ban Russian artists from Ukraine.

Since 2015, Ukraine has banned Russian artists and other Russian works of culture from entering Ukraine.

In 2018, the

romantic comedy

Love in the Big City 2

starring Zelenskyy was banned in Ukraine.

After the Ukrainian media had reported that during the

war in Donbas

Zelenskyy's Kvartal 95 had donated 1 million

hryvnias

to the

Ukrainian army

, some Russian politicians and artists petitioned for a ban on his works in Russia.

Once again, Zelenskyy spoke out against the intention of the

Ukrainian Ministry of Culture

to ban Russian artists from Ukraine.

Kvartal 95 performance in 2018

In 2015, Zelenskyy became the star of the television series

Servant of the People (TV series)

, where he played the role of the president of Ukraine.

In the series, Zelenskyy's character was a high-school history teacher in his 30s who won the presidential election after a

viral video

showed him ranting against government

corruption in Ukraine

.

The comedy series

Svaty

("In-laws"), in which Zelenskyy appeared, was banned in Ukraine in 2017,

but unbanned in March 2019.

Zelenskyy worked mostly in Russian language productions. His first role in the Ukrainian language was the romantic comedy

ထာမ်ပလိက်:Illm

,

which appeared on the screens of Ukraine in December 2018.

The first version of the script was written in Ukrainian but was translated into Russian for the Lithuanian actress

Agnė Grudytė

. Then the movie was

dubbed

into Ukrainian.

2019 presidential campaign

Zelenskyy and then Ukrainian President

Petro Poroshenko

, 19 April 2019

လိက်ပရေင်ဗွဲတြး -

2019 Ukrainian presidential election

In March 2018, members of Zelenskyy's production company

Kvartal 95

registered a new political party called

Servant of the People

 the same name as the television program that Zelenskyy had starred in over the previous three years.

Although Zelenskyy denied any immediate plans to enter politics and said he had only registered the party name to prevent it being appropriated by others,

there was widespread speculation that he was planning to run. As early as October 2018, three months before his campaign announcement and six months before the presidential election, he was already a frontrunner in opinion polls.

On 31 December, less than four months from the election, he announced his candidacy for president of Ukraine on the New Year's Eve evening show on the TV channel

1+1

.

after months of ambiguous statements.

His announcement up-staged the New Year's Eve address of President

Petro Poroshenko

on the same channel,

which Zelenskyy said was unintentional and attributed to a technical glitch.

Zelenskyy's presidential campaign against the incumbent

Petro Poroshenko

was almost entirely virtual.

He did not release a detailed policy platform

and his engagement with mainstream media was minimal;

he instead reached out to the electorate via social media channels and

YouTube

clips.

In place of traditional campaign rallies, he conducted

stand-up comedy

routines across Ukraine with his production company Kvartal 95.

He styled himself as an

anti-establishment

, anti-

corruption

figure, although he was not generally described as a

populist

.

He said he wished to restore trust in politicians, "to bring professional, decent people to power" and to "change the mood and timbre of the political establishment".

On 16 April 2019, a few days before the election, 20 Ukrainian news outlets called on Zelenskyy to "stop avoiding journalists".

Zelenskyy stated that he was not hiding from journalists but that he did not want to go to talk shows where "people of the old power" were "just doing

PR

" and that he did not have time to satisfy all interview requests.

Prior to the elections, Zelenskyy presented a team that included former Finance Minister

Oleksandr Danylyuk

and others.

During the campaign, concerns were raised over his links to the oligarch

Ihor Kolomoyskyi

.

President Poroshenko and his supporters claimed that Zelenskyy's victory would benefit Russia.

On 19 April 2019 at

Olimpiyskiy National Sports Complex

presidential debates were held in the form of a show.

In his introductory speech, Zelenskyy acknowledged that in 2014 he voted for Poroshenko, but "I was mistaken. We were mistaken. We voted for one Poroshenko, but received another. The first appears when there are video cameras, the other Petro sends

Medvedchuk

privietiki (greetings) to Moscow".

Although Zelenskyy initially said he would only serve a single term, he walked back this promise in May 2021, saying he had not yet made up his mind.

Zelenskyy stated that as president he would develop the

economy

and attract investment to Ukraine through "a restart of the

judicial system

" and restoring confidence in the state.

He also proposed a tax amnesty and a 5 per cent

flat tax

for big business which could be increased "in dialogue with them and if everyone agrees".

According to Zelenskyy, if people would notice that his new government "works honestly from the first day", they would start paying their taxes.

Zelenskyy clearly won both the first round of elections on 31 March,

and the run-off election on 21 April 2019.

Zelenskyy was elected President of Ukraine on 21 April 2019, beating the incumbent, Petro Poroshenko with nearly 73 per cent of the vote to Poroshenko's 25 per cent.

Polish President

Andrzej Duda

was one of the first European leaders to congratulate Zelenskyy.

French President

Emmanuel Macron

received Zelenskyy at the

Élysée Palace

in Paris on 12 April 2019.

On 22 April, U.S. President

Donald Trump

congratulated Zelenskyy on his victory over the telephone.

European Commission

President

Jean Claude Juncker

and

European Council

President

Donald Tusk

also issued a joint letter of congratulations and stated that the

European Union

(EU) will work to speed up the implementation of the remainder of the

EU-Ukraine Association Agreement

, including the

Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Area

.

Presidency

ထာမ်ပလိက်:Infobox president styles

Zelenskyy with German Chancellor

Angela Merkel

at the

Federal Chancellery Complex

in Berlin, June 2019.

Zelenskyy and Belarusian President

Alexander Lukashenko

in

Zhytomyr

, October 2019.

Zelenskyy was inaugurated on 20 May 2019.

Various foreign officials attended the ceremony in Ukraine's parliament (

Verkhovna Rada

), including

Salome Zourabichvili

(

Georgia

),

Kersti Kaljulaid

(

Estonia

),

Raimonds Vējonis

(

Latvia

),

Dalia Grybauskaitė

(

Lithuania

),

János Áder

(

Hungary

),

Maroš Šefčovič

(

European Union

), and

Rick Perry

(United States).

Zelenskyy is the first Jewish President of Ukraine. With

Volodymyr Groysman

as Prime Minister, Ukraine became the second country to have both a Jewish President and Prime Minister.

In his inaugural address, Zelenskyy dissolved the

then Ukrainian parliament

and called for

early parliamentary elections

(which had originally been due to be held in October of that year).

One of Zelenskyy's coalition partners, the

People's Front

, opposed the move and withdrew from the ruling coalition.

On 28 May, Zelenskyy restored the Ukrainian citizenship of

Mikheil Saakashvili

.

Zelenskyy's first major proposal to change the electoral system was rejected by the

Ukrainian parliament

.

In addition, on 6 June, lawmakers refused to include Zelenskyy's key initiative on reintroducing criminal liability for illegal enrichment in the parliament's agenda, and instead included a similar bill proposed by a group of deputies.

In June 2019 it was announced that the president's third major initiative, which seeks to remove immunity from lawmakers, diplomats and judges, would be submitted after the July

2019 Ukrainian parliamentary election

.

U.S. Vice President

Mike Pence

and U.S. delegation meets with Zelenskyy in Warsaw on 1 September 2019

Zelenskyy meets with U.S. President

Donald Trump

in New York City on 25 September 2019

On 8 July, Zelenskyy ordered the cancellation of the annual

Kyiv Independence Day Parade

on

Maidan Nezalezhnosti

, citing costs. Despite this, Zelenskyy highlighted that

the day

would "honor heroes" on Independence Day, however the "format will be new".

He also proposed to spend the money that would have been used to finance the parade on veterans.

In 2020, Zelenskyy's party proposed reforms to Ukraine's media laws with the intent to increase competition and loosen the dominance of

Ukrainian oligarchs

on television and radio broadcasters. Critics said it risked increasing

media censorship in Ukraine

because its clause of criminal responsibility for the distribution of disinformation could be abused.

Zelenskyy was criticized for a secret trip to

Oman

in January 2020 that was not published on his official schedule and on which he appeared to mix a personal holiday with government business. Although the president's office said the trip had been paid for by Zelenskyy himself and not with government money, Zelenskyy came under heavy criticism for the lack of transparency around the trip, which was compared unfavourably to a secret vacation his predecessor

Petro Poroshenko

took in the

Maldives

, and which Zelenskyy himself had criticized at the time.

In January 2021, parliament passed a bill updating and reforming Ukraine's

referendum

laws,

which Ukraine's

Constitutional Court

had declared unconstitutional in 2018.

Fixing the referendum law had been one of Zelenskyy's campaign promises.

In June 2021, Zelenskyy submitted to the

Verkhovna Rada

a bill creating a public registry of Ukraine's oligarchs, banning them from participating in privatizations of

state-owned companies

, and forbidding them from contributing financially to politicians. Opposition party leaders supported Zelenskyy's goal of reducing oligarchs' influence on politics in Ukraine but were critical of his approach, saying the public register would be both dangerous, as it concentrated power in the president; and ineffective, since oligarchs were merely a "symbol" of more deeply-rooted corruption.

The bill was passed into law in September 2021.

Cabinets and Administration

Zelenskyy appointed

Andriy Bohdan

as head of the

Presidential Administration of Ukraine

. Prior to this, Bohdan had been the lawyer of

Ukrainian oligarch

Ihor Kolomoyskyi

.

Under the rules of

Lustration in Ukraine

, introduced in 2014 following

Euromaidan

, Bohdan is not entitled to hold any state office until 2024 (because of his government post during the

Second Azarov Government

).

Bohdan, however, contended that because heading the presidential administration is not considered civil service work, lustration did not apply to him.

A number of the members of the Presidential Administration Zelenskyy appointed were former colleagues from his former production company,

Kvartal 95

,

including

Ivan Bakanov

, who became deputy head of the

Ukrainian Secret Service

.

Former Deputy Foreign Minister

Olena Zerkal

declined an appointment as deputy head of the presidential administration, but did agree to serve as the Ukrainian representative of the international courts concerning Russia.

Zelenskyy's requests to replace the foreign minister,

defence minister

, chief prosecutor and head of Ukraine's security service were rejected by parliament.

Zelenskyy also dismissed and replaced 20 of the governors of Ukraine's 24

oblasts

.

Honcharuk government

လိက်ပရေင်ဗွဲတြး -

Honcharuk Government

In the 21 July 2019 parliamentary election, Zelenskyy's political party,

Servant of the People

, won the first single-party majority in modern Ukrainian history in parliament, with 43 per cent of the party-list vote. His party gained 254 of the 424 seats.

Following the elections, Zelenskyy nominated

Oleksiy Honcharuk

as prime minister, who was quickly confirmed by parliament. Parliament also confirmed

Andrii Zahorodniuk

as defence minister,

Vadym Prystaiko

as foreign minister and

Ivan Bakanov

as head of the

SBU

.

Arsen Avakov

, a controversial figure due to longstanding corruption allegations,

was kept on as

interior minister

, with Honcharuk arguing that the relatively inexperienced government needed experienced administrators and that Avakov had been "'drawn red lines' that cannot be crossed."

Zelenskyy dismissed Bohdan as head of his presidential administration on 11 February 2020 and appointed

Andriy Yermak

as his successor the same day.

Shmyhal government

Script error: The module returned a nil value. It is supposed to return an export table.

On 6 March 2020, the Honcharuk government gave way to the

government

of

Denys Shmyhal

. At the time, there was disquiet in the press over the hasty departure of Honcharuk.

In his 4 March address to the Rada,

Zelenskyy recommitted to reforms domestic and financial, and remarked that he "cannot always become a psychologist for people, a crisis manager for someone, a collector who requires honestly earned money, and a nanny of the ministry in charge."

[

နွံပၟိက် ဗၟံက်ထ္ၜးတင်နိဿဲ

]

By September 2020, Zelenskyy's approval ratings had fallen to less than 32 per cent.

Zelenskyy and Turkish President

Recep Tayyip Erdoğan

on 16 October 2020

On 24 March 2021, Zelenskyy signed the Decree 117/2021 approving the "strategy for de-occupation and reintegration of the temporarily occupied territory of the

Autonomous Republic of Crimea

and the city of

Sevastopol

."

Attempts to end the Donbas Conflict

One of Zelenskyy's central campaign promises had been to end the

War in Donbas

and resolve the Russia-sponsored separatist movement there.

On 3 June, Zelenskyy appointed former president

Leonid Kuchma

as Ukraine's representative in the

Tripartite Contact Group

for a settlement in the conflict.

On 11 July 2019, Zelenskyy held his first telephone conversation with Russian President

Vladimir Putin

, during which he urged Putin to enter into talks mediated by European countries.

The two leaders also discussed the exchange of prisoners held by both sides.

In October 2019, Zelenskyy announced a preliminary deal struck with the separatists, under which the Ukrainian government would respect elections held in the region in exchange for Russia withdrawing its

unmarked troops

.

The deal was met with heavy criticism and

protests

by both politicians and the Ukrainian public. Detractors noted that elections held in Donbas were unlikely to be free and fair, that the separatists had long driven out most pro-Ukrainian residents out of the region to ensure a pro-Russia majority, and that it would be impossible to ensure Russia kept its end of the agreement.

Zelenskyy defended his negotiations, saying the elections would not be held before a Russian withdrawal.

In December 2021, he visited far-right Ukrainian nationalist

Azov

fighters in the

Luhansk region

of Donbas and tried to get them to surrender their unregistered weapons and accept the peace accord.

Andriy Biletsky

, the leader of the far-right

National Corps

and first commander of Azov, accused Zelenskyy of being disrespectful to army veterans and of acting on behalf of

the Kremlin

by leaving Ukrainians vulnerable to Russian aggression.

UIA Flight 752

Script error: The module returned a nil value. It is supposed to return an export table.

On 8 January 2020, the Presidential Office announced that Volodymyr Zelenskyy was cutting his trip to Oman short due to the

Ukraine International Airlines Flight 752

plane crash in nearby

Iran

the same day.

The same day, internet news site Obozrevatel.com released information that on 7 January 2020, Ukrainian politician of the

Opposition Platform For Life

Viktor Medvedchuk

 who has exclusive relations with the current

President of Russia

 may have arrived in Oman.

On 9 January 2020, investigative journalists from Skhemy (Schemes: corruption in details) reported that arrival of the President was delayed for almost a whole day and published photos of his arrival.

Soon, rumors began that Zelenskyy may have had some additional meetings beside the ones that were announced.

On 14 January 2020,

Andriy Yermak

dismissed the rumors as speculations and baseless conspiracy theories,

while Medvedchuk stated that the plane was used by his older daughter's family to fly from Oman to Moscow.

Later, Yermak contacted the on-line newspaper

Ukrainian Truth

and gave more details about the visit to Oman and the plane crash in Iran.

Zelenskyy and

Mohammed bin Rashid Al Maktoum

, Prime Minister of the

United Arab Emirates

, in February 2021

On 17 January 2020, the presidential appointee Minister of Foreign Affairs

Vadym Prystaiko

was unable to give answers during the "times of questions to the government" in parliament when the people's deputies of Ukraine asked him about the visit's official agenda, the invitation from Oman, officials of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs who were preparing the visit, as well as how the President actually crossed the border while visiting Oman.

On 20 January 2020, Prystaiko followed up by giving a briefing to the press in the Office of the president of Ukraine and saying that he would explain everything about the visit that when the time came.

Foreign relations

Zelenskyy, Ukraine's Defense Minister

Andriy Taran

and U.S. Secretary of Defense

Lloyd Austin

on 31 August 2021

Zelenskyy and U.S. President

Joe Biden

on 1 September 2021

Script error: The module returned a nil value. It is supposed to return an export table.

Zelenskyy's first official trip abroad as president was to Brussels in June 2019, where he met with

European Union

and

NATO

officials.

In August 2019, Zelenskyy promised to lift the moratorium on exhuming Polish mass graves in Ukraine after the previous Ukrainian government banned the Polish side from carrying out any exhumations of Polish victims of the

Ukrainian Insurgent Army

-perpetrated

Volhynian massacres

, following the removal of a memorial to the Ukrainian Insurgent Army in

Hruszowice

, southeastern Poland.

In September 2019, it was reported that U.S. President Donald Trump had allegedly blocked payment of a congressionally mandated $400 million military aid package to Ukraine to pressure Zelenskyy during a July phone call between the two presidents to investigate alleged wrongdoing by Joe Biden and his son

Hunter Biden

,

who took a board seat on Ukrainian natural gas company

Burisma Holdings

.

This report was the catalyst for the

Trump Ukraine scandal

and the

impeachment inquiry against Donald Trump

. Zelenskyy has denied that he was pressured by Trump and declared that "he does not want to interfere in a foreign election."

Zelenskyy and

Azerbaijan

's President

Ilham Aliyev

on 17 December 2019

On a trip to the United States in September 2021, Zelenskyy engaged in talks and commitments with U.S. President Joe Biden,

Secretary of Defense

Lloyd Austin

,

Secretary of Energy

Jennifer Granholm

,

and Secretary of State

Antony Blinken

.

President Zelenskyy and First Lady

Olena Zelenska

also took part in the opening of the Ukrainian House in Washington, D.C.

On the same trip, he met with

Apple

CEO

Tim Cook

and with Ukrainians in senior positions at

Silicon Valley

tech companies

and spoke at Stanford University.

While Zelenskyy was still in the U.S., just after delivering a speech at the United Nations, an assassination attempt was made in Ukraine on

Serhiy Shefir

, his closest aide. Shefir was unhurt in the attack, although his driver was hospitalized with three bullet wounds.

2021 2022 Russo-Ukrainian crisis

လိက်ပရေင်ဗွဲတြး -

2021 2022 Russo-Ukrainian crisis

In April 2021, in response to Russian military build-up at the Ukrainian borders, Zelenskyy spoke to American president Joe Biden and urged NATO members to speed up

Ukraine's request for membership

.

On 26 November 2021, Zelenskyy accused Russia and Ukrainian oligarch

Rinat Akhmetov

of backing a plan to overthrow his government.

Russia denied any involvement in a coup plot and Akhmetov said in a statement that "the information made public by Volodymyr Zelenskiy about attempts to draw me into some kind of coup is an absolute lie. I am outraged by the spread of this lie, no matter what the president's motives are."

In December 2021, Zelenskyy called for preemptive action against Russia.

On 19 January 2022, Zelenskyy said in a video message that the country's citizens should not panic and appealed to the media to be "methods of mass information and not mass hysteria."

On 28 January, Zelenskyy called on the West not to create a "panic" in his country over a potential Russian invasion, adding that constant warnings of an "imminent" threat of invasion are putting the

economy of Ukraine

at risk.

Zelenskyy said that "we do not see a bigger escalation" than in early 2021 when Russia's military build-up started.

Zelenskyy and U.S. President Joe Biden disagreed on how imminent the threat was.

On 19 February, as worries of a Russian invasion of Ukraine grew, Zelenskyy warned a security forum that Western nations should abandon their "appeasement" attitude toward Moscow. "Ukraine has been granted security assurances in exchange for giving up the world's third-largest nuclear arsenal. We don't have any firearms. And there's no security... But we have a right to urge a transformation from an appeasement policy to one that ensures security and peace," he stated.

In the early hours of 24 February, shortly before the start of the Russian invasion, Zelenskyy recorded an address to the citizens of both Ukraine and Russia. In part of the address, he spoke in Russian to the people of Russia, appealing to them to pressure their leadership to prevent war. He also refuted claims of the Russian government about the presence of

neo-Nazis

in the Ukrainian government and stated that he had no intention of attacking the Donbas region, while highlighting his personal connections to the area.

2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine

Ukraine's Parliament (

Verkhovna Rada

) chairman

Ruslan Stefanchuk

, Ukraine's President Volodymyr Zelenskyy and Ukraine's Prime Minister

Denys Shmyhal

after signing of the application for membership in the European Union during the war on 28 February 2022

လိက်ပရေင်ဗွဲတြး -

2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine

On the morning of 24 February, Putin announced that Russia was initiating a "special military operation" in the Donbas. Russian missiles struck a number of military targets in Ukraine, and Zelenskyy declared martial law.

Zelenskyy also announced that

diplomatic relations with Russia

were being severed, effective immediately.

Later in the day, he announced general mobilisation.

On 25 February, Zelenskyy said that despite Russia's claim that it was targeting only military sites, civilian sites were also being hit.

In an early morning address that day, Zelenskyy said that his intelligence services had identified him as Russia's top target, but that he is staying in Kyiv and his family will remain in the country. "They want to destroy Ukraine politically by destroying the head of state", he said.

In the early hours of 26 February, during the most significant assault by Russian troops on the capital of Kyiv, the United States government and Turkish president

Recep Tayyip Erdoğan

urged Zelenskyy to evacuate to a safer location, and both offered assistance for such an effort. Zelenskyy turned down both offers and opted to remain in Kyiv with its defense forces, saying that "the fight is here [in Kyiv]; I need ammunition, not a ride".

Zelenskyy has gained worldwide recognition as the wartime leader of Ukraine during the Russian invasion; historian

Andrew Roberts

compared him to

Winston Churchill

.

Harvard Political Review

said that Zelenskyy "has harnessed the power of social media to become history's first truly online wartime leader, bypassing traditional gatekeepers as he uses the internet to reach out to the people."

He has been described as a

national hero

or a "global hero" by many commentators, including publications such as

The Hill

,

Deutsche Welle

,

Der Spiegel

and

USA Today

.

BBC News

and

The Guardian

have reported that his response to the invasion has received praise even from previous critics.

During the invasion, three attempts to assassinate Zelenskyy were prevented due to tips from Russian

FSB

employees who opposed the invasion. Two of the attempts were carried out by the

Wagner Group

, a Russian

paramilitary

force, and one by the

Kadyrovtsy

, the personal guard of

Chechen leader

Ramzan Kadyrov

.

While speaking about Ukrainian civilians who were murdered by Russian forces, Zelenskyy said

:

ထာမ်ပလိက်:Quotation2

Zelenskyy has been called by the

Times of Israel

the Jewish defender of Ukrainian democracy.

Zelenskyy, as said by

The Atlantic

has been said to have captivated the world, and gave the world a Jewish Hero.

On 7 March 2022, Czech President

Milos Zeman

decided to award Zelenskyy with the highest state award of the Czech Republic, the

Order of the White Lion

, for "his bravery and courage in the face of Russia's invasion".

Political views

Economic issues

In a mid-June interview with

BIHUS info

[

ထာမ်ပလိက်:Separated entries

]

a

representative of the President of Ukraine

at the

Cabinet of Ministers

,

Andriy Herus

[

ထာမ်ပလိက်:Separated entries

]

stated that Zelenskyy had never promised to lower communal tariffs, but that a campaign video in which Zelenskyy stated that the price of

natural gas in Ukraine

could fall by 20 30 per cent or maybe more was a not a direct promise but actually half-hinting" and "joking".

Notably, Zelenskyy's election manifesto mentioned tariffs only once that money raised from a capital amnesty would go towards "lowering the tariff burden on low-income citizens".

Foreign policy

During his

presidential campaign

, Zelenskyy said that he supported Ukraine's becoming a member of the

European Union

and

NATO

, but he said Ukrainian voters should decide on the country's membership of these two organisations in referenda.

At the same time, he believed that the Ukrainian people had already chosen "eurointegration".

Zelenskyy's close advisor

Ivan Bakanov

also said that Zelenskyy's policy is supportive of membership of both the EU and NATO, and proposes holding referendums on membership.

Zelenskyy's electoral programme claimed that

Ukrainian NATO membership

is "the choice of

the Maidan

and the course that is enshrined in the

Constitution

, in addition, it is an instrument for strengthening our defense capability".

The program states that Ukraine should set the goal to apply for a

NATO Membership Action Plan

in 2024.

The programme also states that Zelenskyy "will do everything to ensure" that

Ukraine can apply for European Union membership

in 2024.

Two days before the second round, Zelenskyy stated that he wanted to build "a strong, powerful, free Ukraine, which is not the younger sister of Russia, which is not a

corrupt

partner of Europe, but our independent Ukraine".

In October 2020, he spoke in support of

Azerbaijan

in regards to the

Nagorno-Karabakh war

between Azerbaijan and ethnic Armenians over the

disputed region

of

Nagorno-Karabakh

. Zelenskyy said: "We support Azerbaijan's territorial integrity and sovereignty just as Azerbaijan always supports our territorial integrity and sovereignty."

In February 2022, he applied for Ukraine to join the

European Union

.

Zelenskyy has tried to position Ukraine as a neutral party in the political and

trade tensions

between the United States and China. In January 2021, Zelenskyy said in an interview with

Axios

that he does not perceive China as a geopolitical threat and that he does not agree with the United States assertions that it represents one.

Russo-Ukrainian War

Script error: The module returned a nil value. It is supposed to return an export table.

Zelenskyy supported the late 2013 and early 2014

Euromaidan

movement. During the

war in Donbas

, he actively supported the

Ukrainian army

.

Zelenskyy helped fund a

volunteer battalion

fighting on

Donbas

.

In a 2014 interview with

Komsomolskaya Pravda in Ukraine

, Zelenskyy said that he would have liked to pay a visit to Crimea, but would avoid it because "armed people are there".

In August 2014, Zelenskyy performed for Ukrainian troops in

Mariupol

and later his studio donated a million hryvnias to the Ukrainian army.

Regarding the

2014 Russian annexation of Crimea

, Zelenskyy said that, speaking realistically, it would be possible to return Crimea to Ukrainian control only after a

regime change

in Russia.

In an interview in December 2018, Zelenskyy stated that as president he would try to end the ongoing war in Donbas by negotiating with Russia.

As he considered the leaders of the

Donetsk People's Republic

and the

Luhansk People's Republic

(DPR and LPR) to be Russia's "puppets", it would "make no sense to speak with them".

He did not rule out holding a referendum on the issue.

In an interview published three days before the 2019 presidential election (on 21 April), Zelenskyy stated that he was against granting the

Donbas

region "special status".

In the interview he also said that if he were elected president he would not sign a law on amnesty for the militants of the DPR and LPR.

In response to suggestions to the contrary, he stated in April 2019 that he regarded Russian President

Vladimir Putin

"as an enemy".

On 2 May 2019, Zelenskyy wrote on Facebook that "the border is the only thing Russia and Ukraine have in common".

Zelenskyy opposes the

Nord Stream 2

natural gas pipeline between Russia and Germany, calling it "a dangerous weapon, not only for Ukraine but for the whole of Europe."

Government reform

Zelenskyy with NATO Secretary General

Jens Stoltenberg

in June 2019

During the presidential campaign, Zelenskyy promised bills to fight corruption, including removal of immunity from the president of the country, members of the

Verkhovna Rada

(the Ukrainian parliament) and judges, a law about impeachment, reform of election laws, and providing efficient trial by jury. He promised to bring the salary for military personnel "to the level of NATO standards".

Although Zelenskyy prefers elections with

open list

election ballots, after he called the snap

2019 Ukrainian parliamentary election

his draft law "On amendments to some laws of Ukraine in connection with the change of the electoral system for the election of people's deputies" proposed to hold the election with

closed list

because the 60-day term to the snap election did not "leave any chances for the introduction of this system".

Social issues

Zelenskyy in the Donetsk region in June 2021

Zelenskyy supports the free distribution of

medical cannabis

, free

abortion in Ukraine

, and the legalisation of

prostitution

and

gambling

.

He opposes the

legalisation of firearms

.

Zelenskyy stated in April 2019 that "of course" he supports the

decommunization of Ukraine

, but is not happy with its current form.

In an interview with RBC-Ukraine in April 2019, Zelenskyy said that

OUN-B

leader

Stepan Bandera

, a controversial figure in

Ukrainian history

, was "a hero for a certain part of Ukrainians, and this is a normal and cool thing. He was one of those who defended the freedom of Ukraine. But I think that when we name so many streets, bridges by the same name, this is not quite right."

In that same interview, Zelenskyy went on to criticise the overuse of tributes to

Taras Shevchenko

, a famous 19th century Ukrainian poet and painter. Zelenskyy concluded: "We must remember the heroes of today, heroes of the arts, heroes of literature, simply heroes of Ukraine. Why don't we use their names the names of the heroes that today unite Ukraine?"

Zelenskyy opposes targeting the

Russian language in Ukraine

and banning artists for their political opinions (such as those viewed by the Government as

anti-Ukrainian

).

In April 2019, he stated that he was not against a

Ukrainian language

quota (

on radio and TV

), although he noted they could be tweaked.

He also said that Russian artists "who have turned into (anti-Ukrainian) politicians" should remain banned from entering Ukraine.

Pandora Papers

The October 2021

Pandora Papers

revealed that Zelenskyy and his chief aide and the head of the

Security Service of Ukraine

Ivan Bakanov

operated a network of offshore companies in the

British Virgin Islands

,

Cyprus

, and

Belize

. These companies included some that owned expensive London property.

Around the time of his

2019 election

, Zelenskyy handed his shares in a key offshore company over to Shefir, but the two men appear to have made an arrangement for Zelenskyy's family to continue receiving the money from these companies.

Zelenskyy's election campaign had centred on pledges to

clean up

the

government of Ukraine

.

In a 17 October 2021 interview with

ICTV

, Zelenskyy did not deny that in 2012 he used offshore companies.

He claimed he did this to avoid (his then satirical TV shows) being "influenced by politics".

Zelenskyy stressed that neither he nor any member of "

Kvartal 95

" were involved in

money laundering

.

Personal life

Volodymyr Zelenskyy and

Olena Zelenska

in

2019 parliamentary election

In September 2003, Zelenskyy married

Olena Kiyashko

,

with whom he had attended school.

The couple's first daughter, Oleksandra, was born in July 2004.

Their son, Kyrylo, was born in January 2013.

In Zelenskyy's 2014 movie

8 New Dates

, their daughter played Sasha, the daughter of the protagonist.

In 2016, she participated in the show

The Comedy Comet Company Comedy's Kids

and won 50,000

hryvnias

.

Zelenskyy's first language is Russian, and he is also fluent in

Ukrainian

and English.

His assets were worth about 37 million hryvnias (about $1.5 million USD) in 2018.

Selected filmography

The film premiere of

I, You, He, She

Film

Television series and shows

Notes

ကလေင်ကေတ်လဝ် နူ "

"