ခပြုင်

တၞံခပြုင် (Sterculia foetida)

ဂှ် ဒှ်တၞံဆု ဂကူဆုၜတ်တ် ဇၞော် သမၠုင် စဵုကဵု ၃၅ မဳတာ (၁၁၅ ပေ) စိုပ်မာန်ရ။ တၞံဆုဝွံ နကဵုဘာသာအင်္ဂလိက် ကော်ဒၟံင် ယၟုနာနာ မပ္တံကဵု

bastard poon tree

,

java olive tree

,

hazel sterculia

,

wild almond tree

, ကေုာံ

skunk tree။

တၞံခပြုင် ဝွံ လုပ်လၟိဟ်ဗဳဇ

Sterculia

မဂွံအဓိပ္ပါယ် ပသ ရ။ ပ္ဍဲကဵု အရေဝ်မန် "ကော ညံင် ကဴခပြုင် (ဟရုင်)၊ ဆုင် ခ္ဍင် ပသ ခ္ဍင်" မဂွံအဓိပ္ပါယ် ညးမဒှ် ကောဇၞော်ဂှ် စိုတ်ပရေအ် ဓဝ်ဆာန်ဍူ လတူဒေအ်တအ် ဟွံမဲရ။

လက်သန်

The branches of

Sterculia foetida

are arranged in whorls; they spread horizontally. The tree's bark is smooth and grey. The leaves are placed at the end of branchlets; they have 125 230 mm long petioles; the blades are palmately compound, containing 7-9 leaflets. The leaflets are elliptical, 100 170 mm long, and shortly petioluled The petioles are the source of the foul smell of the plant.

The flowers are arranged in panicles, 100 150 mm long. The green or purple flowers are large and unisexual as the tree is dioecious (male and female flowers are found on different trees). The pollens are oval in shape, approximately 40 microns in length. The calyx is dull orange and is divided into five sepals, each one 10-13 mm long. The fruit consists of four to five follicles, each follicle generally containing 10-15 seeds. The follicles are scarlet when ripe.
In India, flowers appear in March, and the leaves appear between March and April. At Hyderabad (India), flowering was observed in September-October (2015) with ripened fruits on the top part and young green fruits at the lower branches. The fruit is ripe in February (11 months after the flowers appeared).

လွပ်

The oil of

Sterculia foetida

has been found to be comparable to sunflower, soybean, and grapeseed oils for the use of biofuels.

Sterculia foetida

oil contains cyclopropene fatty acids (CPFA) such as 8,9 methylene-heptadec-8-enoic acid (malvalic acid) and 9,10-methylene-ocadec-9-enoic acid (sterculic acid). The flash point, iodine value, free fatty acid count, phosphorus content, cloud point, pour point, viscosity at 40 °C, oxidative stability at 110 °C, density, and trace metal count are all within ASTM and EN specifications.

Evidence suggests that the seeds of

Sterculia foetida

are edible, but purgative,

and should be roasted prior to eating. At least one review indicates that CPFA such as sterculic acid are carcinogenic, co-carcinogenic, and have medical and other effects on animals; according to this review, "CPFA in food is dangerous to human health".

ဂမ္စာဲ

Sterculia foetida

has been found in many areas, including India, Taiwan, Indochina, the Philippines (where it is known as

kalumpang

),

United States (Hawaii), Indonesia, Ghana, Australia, Mozambique, and Togo.

ဗီုရုပ်ဂမၠိုင်

Pollen

Follicle and seeds -

MHNT

Points marked in red are known occurrences of

Stercula foetida

Fruit and leaves

နိဿဲ

ကလေင်ကေတ်လဝ် နူ "

"