ဇဳဝဇဵု

ဂစေံဇဳဝဇဵု (

edible-nest swiftlet)

(

Aerodramus fuciphagus

), နကဵုဘာသာအင်္ဂလိက် သီုမကော်စ (

white-nest swiftlet)

ဂှ် ဒှ်ဂစေံသၟတ် မလုပ်လၟိဟ် ဂကောံသ္ၚိကၟိန် ဂစေံဒံင်ဒါင် /ဂစေံဝေင်ဇြင်တုဲ ဂွံဆဵုကေတ် ပ္ဍဲကဵု အာရှဒိုဟ်အဂၞဲ။ ဂစေံဝွံ ဍေဟ်ကၠောန်ခပေါဲ နကဵု ဍာ်ပါင်တုဲ ခပေါဲဂစေံဏအ်ဂှ် မၞိဟ်တအ်စ ဍုန်ဒဒှ် သွသောတ်ခပေါဲဂစေံ ရ။

ဗမံက်ထ္ၜး

ဂစေံဇဳဝဇဵုဝွံ နွံဇမၠိင် အကြာ ၁၁ ကဵု ၁၂ သေန်ဒဳမဳတာ လျိုင် နွံ အကြာ ၁၅ ကဵု ၁၈ ဂရာမ်။ ကသော်ဍေဟ် နွံအသာ် လစံက်ဖျိုဟ်ဟ် လပါ်လတူတုဲ လပါ်သၟဝ် (ဗွဲတၟေင် ပ္ဍဲသြိုဟ်)ဂှ် ဒှ်အသာ်ပတေင် (ဗုကၠိကၠိ)။ ဗတဍေဟ် ခွတိတ်ဒၟံင်တုဲ သၞေင်ဍေဟ်ဂှ် ဂၠိင်ဍောတ်။ ခၟူ ကဵု ပါင် လမ္စံက်။

The subspecies

A. f. micans

is paler and greyer while

A. f. vestitus

is darker with a rump that is less obviously paler.

ဍေဟ်လရိုအ် ရမ္သာင်နာနာ မလေပ်မံင် ပ္ဍဲကဵု ထီုဒမၠုရ။

ဂမ္စာဲ ကေုာံ ဂကူလစှ်ေ

ဂစေံ မကၠောန်ခပေါဲ နကဵု ဍာ်ပါင်တုဲ ခပေါဲဍေဟ် မၞိဟ်တအ် မစဂွံဂှ် သီုဖအိုတ် နွံ ဂကူလစှ်ေ ၆ ဂကူ။

A. f. fuciphagus

 မဂွံဆဵုကေတ် ပ္ဍဲ ဂျာဗာ၊ ဗာလဳ ကေုာံ ကရေက်လပါ်ပလိုတ် တကအ် Lesser Sunda Islands

A. f. inexpectatus

 ၜဳအာတ်ဒမေန် ကေုာံ တကအ်နိကဝ်ပါ၊ ဍုင်ဗၟာ လပါ်သၠုင်ကျာ။

A. f. dammermani

 Flores, known from only a single specimen

A. f. micans

 ကရေက်လပါ်ဗမံက် Lesser Sundas (Sumba, Savu ကဵု Timor)

A. f. vestitus

 သုမာတ္တတြာ၊ ဗေါရ်နေယဝ်၊ လဆောဝ်ဂကူတၞဟ်လေဝ်နွံ (

brown-rumped swiftlet)

,

Aerodramus vestitus

(Lesson, 1843).

A. f. perplexus

 Maratua Archipelago လပါ်ဗမံက် ဗောရ်နေယဝ်

စရိုတ်

The edible-nest swiftlet feeds over a range of habitats from coastal areas to the mountains, occurring up to 2,800 metres above sea-level on Sumatra and Borneo. Its diet consists of flying insects which are caught on the wing. It often feeds in large flocks with other species of swiftlet and swallow.

It breeds in colonies in caves, in a cleft in a cliff or sometimes on a building. The bracket-shaped nest is white and translucent and is made of layers of hardened saliva attached to the rock. It measures about 6 cm across with a depth of 1.5 cm and a weight of about 14 grams. Two white, oval, non-glossy eggs are laid.

မဆက်စပ် ကုမၞိဟ်

ခပေါဲ ကိုပ်ကၠာ ဟွံဂွံဍုန်ဏီ

The nest used in bird's nest soup is composed almost entirely of saliva with little or no plant material. The soup is made by soaking and steaming the nests in water and is said to be an aphrodisiac and to have various medicinal qualities. The nests can fetch high prices and many colonies are harvested commercially.

Some populations such as those in the Andaman and Nicobar Islands have been harvested extensively leading to them being considered critically threatened under the IUCN criteria.

The use of artificial bird houses is growing.

A detailed account of modern nest farming and marketing techniques is given by David Jordan (2004). In Malaysia, "farming" of nests is performed in purpose-built structures or old empty houses with "tweeters" playing recordings of bird calls on the roof to attract swiftlets. In urban areas, such "bird houses" may be considered a nuisance by neighbours due to the loud bird calls and bird feces.

နိဿဲ

BirdLife International

(2014).

"

Aerodramus fuciphagus

"

.

IUCN Red List of Threatened Species

.

IUCN

.

2014

. Retrieved

29 August

2014

.

Boyle, Joe (27 Jan 2011).

Welcome to Indonesia's bird nest soup factory town

. BBC.

ကလေင်ကေတ်လဝ် နူ "

"